
Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries. See
      http://archive.org/details/pastonlettersad06gairuoft

Transcriber's note:

      This text uses UTF-8 (Unicode) file encoding. If the
      apostrophes and quotation marks in this paragraph appear
      as garbage, make sure your text reader’s “character set”
      or “file encoding” is set to Unicode (UTF-8). You may also
      need to change the default font. As a last resort, use the
      Latin-1 (iso-8859-1) version of the file instead.

      The Gairdner edition of the Paston Letters was printed in six
      volumes. Each volume is a separate e-text; Volume VI is further
      divided into two e-texts, Letters and Index. Volume I, the
      General Introduction, will be released after all other volumes,
      matching the original publication order.

      Except for footnotes and sidenotes, all brackets are in the
      original, as are parenthetical question marks and (_sic_)
      notations. Series of dots representing damaged text are shown
      as in the printed original.

      The year was shown in a sidenote at the top of each page; this
      has been merged with the sidenote at the beginning of each
      Letter or Abstract.

      A carat character is used to denote superscription. The
      character(s) following the carat is superscripted (example:
      vj^ti). Braces { } are used only when the superscripted
      text is immediately followed by non-superscripted letters
      or period (full stop).  Subscripts rare) are shown with
      single lines _. Errata and other transcriber’s notes are
      shown in [[double brackets]].

      Footnotes have their original numbering, with added page
      number to make them usable with the full Index. They are
      grouped at the end of each Letter or Abstract.

      Typographical errors are listed at the end of each Letter,
      after the footnotes. In the primary text, errors were only
      corrected if they are clearly editorial, such as missing
      italics, or mechanical, such as u-for-n misprints. Italic
      “d” misprinted as “a” was a recurring problem, especially
      in Volume IV. The word “invisible” means that there is
      an appropriately sized blank space, but the letter or
      punctuation mark itself is missing. The form “corrected
      by author” refers to the Errata printed at the end of the
      Letters, in Volume VI.

      Specifics: The spelling “Jhon” is not an error. Gresham
      and Tresham are different people. Conversely, the
      inconsistent spelling “Lipyate” or “Lipgate” in footnotes
      is unchanged.

      Note that the printed book used z to represent original yogh
      ȝ. This has not been changed for the e-text.





This edition, published by arrangement with Messrs. ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE
AND COMPANY, LIMITED, is strictly limited to 650 copies for Great
Britain and America, of which only 600 sets are for sale, and are
numbered 1 to 600.

No. 47

  [[The number 47 is handwritten.]]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *


              THE PASTON LETTERS

                A.D. 1422-1509


           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


THE PASTON LETTERS
A.D. 1422-1509

New Complete Library Edition

Edited with Notes and an Introduction

by

JAMES GAIRDNER
of the Public Record Office

_VOLUME VI_







London
Chatto & Windus

[Decoration]

Exeter
James G. Commin
1904

Edinburgh: T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Edward IV_




936

SIR JOHN PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[1-1]

_To John Paston, Esquyer, be thys lettre delyveryd, or to my mestresse,
hys wyffe, at Norwych, to delyver to hym._

[Sidenote: 1478 / AUG. 25]

Brother John, I recomaund me to yow, and I thanke God, my sustr yowr
wyffe, and yow, off my ffayr nevywe Crystofore, whyche I undrestande ye
have, wher off I ame ryght gladde, and I praye God sende yow manye, if
it be Hys plesyr; nevertheless ye be nott kynde, that ye sende me no
wetyng ther off; I hadde knowlege by ffootemen, or ever ye kowde ffynde
any messenger on horsbak to brynge me worde theroff.

Sir, it is soo, that the Duke off Bokyngham shall come on pilgrymage to
Walsyngham, and so to Bokenham Castell to my lady hys sustr;[1-2] and
then it is supposyd that he shalle to my Lady off Norffolk.[1-3] And myn
oncle William comythe with hym; and he tellyth me, that ther is like to
be troble in the maner off Oxenhed; wherffor I praye yow take hedde
lesse that the Duke off Suffolk councell pley therwith now at the
vacacion[1-4] off the beneffyse, as they ded with the beneffice off
Drayton, whyche by the helpe off Mr. John Salett and Donne hys man, ther
was a qweste made by the seyde Donne, that ffownde that the Duke off
Suffolk was verrye patrone, whyche was ffalse, yitt they ded it ffor an
evydence; but nowe iff any suche pratte scholde be laboryd, it is I hope
in bettr case, ffor suche a thynge most needs be ffownde byffor Master
John Smyth, whyche is owr olde ffreende; wherffor I praye yow labor hym,
that, iff neede bee, he maye doo use a ffreends torne therin.

Item, bothe ye and I most neds take thys mater as owr owne, and it weer
ffor noon other cawse butt ffor owr goode grawnt dames sake;
neverthelesse ye woote well, thatt ther is an other entresse longyng to
usse afftr her dyscease; iffe ther be any suche thynge begune ther by
suche a fryer or prest, as it is seyde, I mervayle that ye sente me no
worde ther off; butt ye have nowe wyffe and chyld, and so moche to kar
ffor, thatt ye fforgete me.

As for tydyngs her, I her telle that my cosyn Sir Robert Chamberleyn
hathe entyrd the maner of Scolton uppon yowr bedffelawe[2-1] Conyerse,
wheroff ye sende me no worde.

Item, yonge William Brandon is in warde and arestyd ffor thatt he
scholde have by fforce ravysshyd and swyvyd an olde jentylwoman, and
yitt was nott therwith easyd, butt swyvyd hyr oldest dowtr, and than
wolde have swyvyd the other sustr bothe; wherffor men sey ffowle off
hym, and that he wolde ete the henne and alle hyr chekynnys; and som
seye that the Kynge entendyth to sitte uppon hym, and men seye he is
lyke to be hangyd, ffor he hathe weddyd a wedowe.

Item, as ffor the pagent that men sey that the Erle off Oxenforde[2-2]
hathe pleyid atte Hammys, I suppose ye have herde theroff; itt is so
longe agoo, I was nott in thys contre when the tydyngs come, therfor I
sent yow no worde theroff.

But ffor conclusion, as I her seye, he lyepe the wallys, and wente to
the dyke, and in to the dyke to the chynne; to whatt entent I can nott
telle; some sey, to stele awey, and some thynke he wolde have drownyd
hymselffe, and so it is demyd.

No mor, but I ame nott sertayne whether I shall come home in haste or
nott.

Wretyn at London, the daye nexte Seynt Bartelmewe,[3-1] anno E. iiij^ti
xviij^o.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 1-1: [From Fenn, ii. 270.]]

    [Footnote 1-2: Joan, sister to Henry, Duke of Buckingham, was the
    second wife of Sir William Knevet, Knight, of Bokenham Castle, in
    Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 1-3: Elizabeth, widow of John Mowbray, Duke of
    Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 1-4: Agnes Paston, grandmother to Sir John, presented
    Thomas Everard to the Rectory of Oxnead in 1475, and in 1479, she
    again presented William Barthulmew, so that the Duke of Suffolk
    either did not attempt to disturb her right; or at least did not
    succeed, if he endeavoured to do it.--F. It will be seen by No.
    935 that before presenting William Barthulmew she presented Dr.
    Richard Lyncoln.]

    [Footnote 2-1: A word at this time, implying a friend, or intimate
    acquaintance, who really slept in the same bed. _See_ Steevens’
    Shakspeare, _Henry V._ Act ii. Sc. 2.--F.]

    [Footnote 2-2: John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, had been for several
    years a prisoner in the Castle of Hammes, in Picardy. He became a
    favourite of Henry VII. and died in the reign of Henry VIII.--F.]

    [Footnote 3-1: St. Bartholomew’s Day is the 24th August. ‘The day
    _next_ St. Bartholomew’ should be the 25th, unless the writer
    meant to say ‘next before.’]


937

ABSTRACT[3-2]

WILLIAM PASTON TO NICHOLAS GOLDEWELL

[Sidenote: 1478 / OCT. 9]

Spoke to him on Sunday about a clerk presented by William Paston’s
mother to the Church of Oxnead, and not admitted, though the
presentation was delivered to Master John Bulman, my lord’s deputy,
within the time limited by law. Requests him to get the Bishop to do him
justice. The living is of small value, and the delay can be of little
benefit to my lord. Desires an answer by the bearer, Sir William Upgate,
Vicar of Castre.

Norwich, 9 Oct.

  [The MS. is a corrected draft partly in William Paston’s own hand,
  endorsed ‘The copy of a lettre to Mr. Nicholas Goldewell, broder to
  the Busshopp of Norwich, ix^o Octobris, anno xviij^o E. iiij^ti, by
  Sir William Ubgate, Vicar of Castre.’]

    [Footnote 3-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


938

ABSTRACT[3-3]

WILLIAM PASTON TO WILLIAM POPE OF BACTON

[Sidenote: 1478 / OCT. 17]

Cannot be at the Court at Paston on Monday next. Bids him warn the
tenants to keep the Court on Friday instead, and to bring their rents,
for he will be there himself. He is also to warn the tenants of Bakton
to-morrow openly in the church of the said Court to be kept on Friday
next; also the tenants of Swaffeld, Mundesley,[4-1] Edyngthorpe, and
Wytton.

Norwich, Saturday after St. Edward,[4-2] the ---- October.

  [The MS. is a draft with corrections in the handwriting of William
  Paston, endorsed--‘The copy of a lettre to William Pope of Bacton,
  the xvij. day of Octobre, anno xviij^o E. iiij^ti, by William Dam of
  Rughton.’]

    [Footnote 3-3: _Ibid._]

    [Footnote 4-1: This name is very ill written, and looks more like
    ‘Maxsley’; but Mundesley is the only place in the neighbourhood
    that seems at all probable.]

    [Footnote 4-2: Translation of St. Edward the Confessor, 13th
    October. The Saturday after it in 1478, was the 17th, but the
    writer has left only a blank for the day.]


939

WILLIAM PASTON, JUNIOR, TO JOHN PASTON[4-3]

_To hys worchepful brodyr, John Paston, be thys delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1478 / NOV. 7]

Ryght reverent and worchepful brodyr, I recomaunde me on to yow,
desyrynge to here of yowre welfare and prosperite; letynge yow wete that
I have resevyd of Alwedyr a lettyr and a nobyll in gowlde therin.
Ferthermor my creansyr [_creditor_], Mayster Thomas,[4-4] hertely
recomandyd hym to yow, and he praythe yow to sende hym sum mony for my
comons; for he seythe ye be xx^{ti}_s._ in hys dette, for a monthe was
to pay for when he had mony laste.

Also I beseche yow to sende me a hose clothe, one for the halydays of
sum colore, and a nothyr for the workyng days, how corse so ever it be
it makyth no matyr; and a stomechere, and ij. schyrtes, and a peyer of
sclyppers. And if it lyke yow that I may come with Alwedyr be watyr, and
sporte me with yow at London a day or ij. thys terme tyme, than ye may
let all thys be tyl the tyme that I come, and than I wol telle you when
I schall be redy to come from Eton, by the grace of God, Whom have yow
in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn the Saturday next aftyr All Halown Day, with the hand of your
brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 4-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] William Paston, the writer
    of this letter, was a younger son of old John Paston, and brother
    of the John Paston to whom the letter is addressed. He was born,
    as Fenn tells us, in 1459, and it will be seen by what is said of
    him in Letter 842 that he could not possibly be older. He was now
    at Eton finishing his education, and we have a letter from him
    written there on the 23rd of February 1479, which gives good
    reason for attributing this to the November immediately before.]

    [Footnote 4-4: Thomas Stevenson. _See_ Letter 942 _post_.]


940

ERRANDS TO MARLINGFORD[5-1]

[Sidenote: 1479 / JAN. 18]

Do[5-2] Gerald of Marlingford come to me, and know were he ys become; in
qw[at] place he hydyth hym, he dothe but distroyh hym selff.

Do on Steward [of] Colton, a tenaunte of Marlingford, come to me.

Do[5-2] Sir John Chapman,[5-3] parson of Oure Ladies Chyrche, send hider
the bill of rekenyng of Richard Hervy, shewyng what stokke was delivered
be Richard Hervy to Harry Hervy, and also a bille what costes that
Richard H[ervy] . . . . of at that tyme.[5-4]

Do[5-2] John Brigg come to me and bryng me suyrte for hys dette, and
know qwat wey the parson off Melton takyth with hym.

. . de the par[sone] off Melton come to me to Norwych, for tell [him
that] and he come nat hastely he schall nat fynd me here.

Item, pray the parson off Melton to call up on the parteculer tenauntes
off Melton that have had parteculer fermys fro Michaelmas xvij. til
Michaelmas xviij. to pay ther fermys.

    [Footnote 5-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This is a paper of
    memoranda by William Paston, partly in his own handwriting,
    endorsed--‘Erandes to Marlyngford, the xvij. day of Januar, anno
    xviij^o, wer off a copy was delyvered at Sent Edmundes the same
    d[ay].’]

    [Footnote 5-2: ‘Do,’ _i.e._ cause.]

    [Footnote 5-3: He was rector of St. Mary’s Church, Melton.]

    [Footnote 5-4: This paragraph is crossed out in the MS.]

  [[Sidenote: 1479 / JAN. 18
  _date printed as shown, but see first footnote_

  Footnote 5-1
  [From Paston MSS., B.M.]
  _comma missing or invisible_]]


941

WILLIAM PYKENHAM TO MARGARET PASTON[6-1]

_To my Mastresse M[argaret Paston], att Norwiche._

[Sidenote: 1479 / FEB. 2]

My worschypfull mastresse, I recomende me un to yow, and thanke yow of
yowr approvyd ensewryd gyudenesse evermore shewde, and so I pray yow to
contenew. I have resyvyd yowr letter, and undrestonde yowr desyre, wyche
ys ageyns the lawe for three causys. Oon ys, for yowr son Watre ys nott
tonsewryd, in modre tunge callyd Benett; a nodre cause, he ys not
xxiiij. yeer of aghe, wyche ys requiryd complete; the thyrde, ye owte
[_he ought_] of ryzte to be preyst within dwelmothe after that he ys
parson, wyth owte so were he hadd a dyspensacion fro Rome be owre Holy
Fadre the Pope, wyche I am certen can not be hadde. Therfor I present
not yowr desyre un to my lorde,[6-2] lest ye [_he_] wolde have takyn yt
to a dysplesur, or else to take a grete sympylnesse in yowr desyre,
wyche shulde cause hym, in suche matres as xall fortune yow to spede
with hym a nodre tyme, to shew un to yow the rigur of the lawe, wyche I
wolde be lothe; therfor present a nodre man abyll. Haske consell of Mr.
John Smythe, and sease of yowr desyre in thysse partey, for yt ys not
goodely nether Goddely; and lete not yowr desyre be knowyn, aftyr my
avyse. Be not wrothe, thowe I sende un to yow thusse playnyly in the
matre; for I wolde ye dede as wele as any woman in Norfolke, [that ys,
wyth rygth],[6-3] to yowr honor, prosperite, an to the plesur of Godde,
with yowre and all yowres, Ho have yow in Hyse blessyd kepyng.

From Hoxne on Candylmasse Day.

  WILLIAM PYKYNHAM.[7-1]

I sende yow yowr presente agen in the boxe.

    [Footnote 6-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Walter Paston, to whom
    this letter refers, died in August 1479. This letter was probably
    written in the beginning of the same year. The date certainly
    cannot be 1478, if No. 926 has been assigned to the right year,
    for it will be seen that the writer was then in London, and so
    much occupied that he had little prospect of visiting Norfolk for
    some time.]

    [Footnote 6-2: James Goldwell was consecrated by Pope Sextus IV.
    Bishop of Norwich in 1472. He resided much at his manor of Hoxne,
    where he died in 1498.--F.]

    [Footnote 6-3: These words are struck through with the pen.]

    [Footnote 7-1: William de Pykenham became Chancellor of Norwich
    and Archdeacon of Suffolk in 1471, and was also some time Rector
    of Hadleigh in Suffolk, where he built the grand gate or tower
    before the parsonage. He died in 1497.--F.]


942

WILLIAM PASTON, JUNIOR, TO JOHN PASTON[7-2]

_To his worchepfull broder, John Paston, be thys delivered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1479 / FEB. 23]

Ryght reverent and worchepfull broder, after all dewtes of
recomendacion, I recomaunde me to yow, desyryng to here of your
prosperite and welfare, whych I pray God long to contynew to Hys
plesore, and to your herts desyr; letyng yow wete that I receyved a
letter from yow, in the whyche letter was viij_d._ with the whyche I
schuld bye a peyer of slyppers.

Ferthermor certyfying yow, as for the xiij_s._ iiij_d._ whyche ye sende
by a jentylmannys man, for my borde, cawlyd Thomas Newton, was delyvered
to myn hostes, and soo to my creancer [_creditor_], Mr. Thomas
Stevenson; and he hertely recomended hym to yow.

Also ye sende me worde in the letter of xij_li._ fyggs and viij_li._
reysons. I have them not delyvered, but I dowte not I shal have, for
Alwedyr tolde me of them, and he seyde that they came aftyr in an other
barge.

And as for the yong jentylwoman, I wol certyfye yow how I fryste felle
in qweyntaince with hyr. Hir ffader is dede; ther be ij. systers of
them; the elder is just weddyd; at the whych weddyng I was with myn
hostes, and also desyryd by the jentylman hym selfe, cawlyd Wylliam
Swanne, whos dwyllynge is in Eton.

So it fortuned that myne hostes reportyd on me odyrwyse than I was
wordy; so that hyr moder comaundyd hyr to make me good chere, and soo in
good feythe sche ded. Sche is not a bydynge ther sche is now; hyr
dwellyng is in London; but hyr moder and sche come to a place of hyrs
v. myle from Eton, were the weddyng was, for because it was nye to the
jentylman whych weddyd hyr dowtyr. And on Monday next comynge, that is
to sey, the fyrst Monday of Clene Lente, hyr moder and sche wyl goo to
the pardon at Schene, and soo forthe to London, and ther to abyde in a
place of hyrs in Bowe Chyrche Yerde; and if it plese yow to inquere of
hyr, hyr modyrs name is Mestres Alborow, the name of the dowtyr is
Margarete Alborow, the age of hyr is be all lykelyod xviij. or xix. yere
at the fertheste. And as for the mony and plate, it is redy when soo
ever sche were weddyd; but as for the lyvelod, I trow not tyll after hyr
modyrs desese, but I can not telle yow, for very certeyn, but yow may
know by inqueryng. And as for hyr bewte, juge yow that when ye see hyr,
yf so be that ye take the laubore, and specialy beolde hyr handys, for
and if it be as it is tolde me, sche is dysposyd to be thyke.

And as for my comynge from Eton, I lake no thynge but wersyfyynge,
whyche I troste to have with a lytyll contynuance.

Quæritur, Quomodo non valet hora, valet mora? Unde dicitur?

    Arbore jam videas exemplum. Non die possunt,
      Omnia suppleri; sed tamen illa mora.[8-1]

And thes too verse afore seyde be of myn own makyng.

No more to yow at thys tyme, but God have yow in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn at Eton the Even of Seynt Matthy the Apostyll in haste, with the
hande of your broder.

  WYLL’M PASTON, Jun^{r}.

    [Footnote 7-2: [From Fenn, i. 296.] This letter was written on the
    23rd of February, and the Monday following the date was the first
    Monday of Lent. These particulars prove the letter to have been
    written in 1479, when William Paston was between nineteen and
    twenty years of age.]

    [Footnote 8-1: I am favoured by Lady Beatrice Pretyman with a
    facsimile of this Latin theme and distich from the original MS. My
    reading of the contracted words differs from that printed
    originally by Fenn.]

  [[but hyr moder and sche come to a place of hyrs
  _text has “sch come”: corrected from Fenn_]]


943

PARSONAGE OF OXNEAD[9-1]

[Sidenote: 1479]

Memorandum.--The day that the lapse went out, which is such day vj.
monethes as the seid parson died, was on Tewesday, Our Lady Day, the
Nativite, the viij^te day of Septembre last past, anno xviij^o.

The day of vj. monethes affter Our seide Lady Day, the Nativite was on
Seint Mathes Day[9-2] the Apostell, last past, whiche was the xxiiij.
day of Februare, and so I deme eyther the Bisshoppe of Norwiche hath
presented or els it is in the gifft of my Lord Cardinall[9-3] nowe.
Inquere this mater, for the Bisshoppe of Norwich lythe in London, and
shall doo till Our Ladys Day this Lenton, as it is said here.

My moder delivered Sir William Holle his presentacion the xiij. day of
August, anno xviij^o, which was nere a monethe or the day of the vj.
monethes went out and past. Wherfore the Bisshoppe ought to present my
moders clarke. Neverthelesse the Bisshoppys officeres aunsware this
sayng, that if sondry persones deliver ij. sondrye presentacions for to
diverse clarkes to the Bisshoppes officers for one benefice, that then
the seid partyes shuld sue to the Bisshop at ther cost to have out an
inquerre to inquere _de vero patrono_, sayng forther more, that if they
sue nat out this inquerre with affect, and that the lapse fall, than it
is lefull for the Bisshop to present, and it is told me that the lawe is
this, that the Bisshoppe, be his office with out any sute of the
parties, shall call an inquerre afore hym to inquere _de vero patrono_,
and he shall assign them a day to bryng in a verdett, and he shall warne
bothe partyes to be ther at, and he shall amytte his clarke that is
founde patron.

Yet the Bisshopp useth nat to do this, but there as bothe partyes that
present are myghty [and wher as he thynketh it were a jopardy to
hym][10-1] to sue the Bisshoppe if he did them any wrong, and wher as
ther is a doubtable mater; but in this case the prest that troubleth my
moder is but a simple felowe, and he is _appostata_, for he was somtyme
a White Frere, and of simple repetacyon, and of litill substans, as my
moder can tell, wherfore Bisshoppys use nat in suche litill casys to
take so streyte an inquerre, and specyally wher as one hath contynued
patron with out interupcion so long as my moder hath done, for she hath
contynued more than l. wynter; wherfore I pray yow shewe my cousyn
Lovell this bill, and fynde some meanes to intrete the Bisshopp by the
meane of James Hobard,[10-2] which is grete with the Bisshopp, and is
nowe Reder of Lyncoln Inne this Lent. And late my lady speke to James
Hobard in the mater. If it please my moder ther is a prest callde Sir
----[10-3] which is thought by the tenauntes of Oxned a metely man to be
parson ther; the most thyng that I dowte, bicause Sir William Holle,
whom my moder presented, is ronne away, and if the Bisshop will nat
present my moders clarke in her title, than I wold that the labour myght
be made to the Bisshopp, that he myght present my moders clarke, suche
on as shoe will name, in his one title.

Ric. Lee, like as ze may understand be this writing, where as I
understod that the Bisshopp myght have kept the benefice but vj.
monethes after the patrons vj. monethes war worn out, now I understand
the contrary, for I understand he may kepe it a twelmo[nethe] and a day
. . . . [_several lines lost_] . . . . . .

Also, if ze knew any yong preste in London that setteth billis upon
Powlys dorr per aventure wold be glad to have it, and woll be glad also
to serve my lady and my moder for it for a season, I can no more say but
purvay a mean to the Bisshopp, that som mon may be put in by my moders
title.

. . . . . of the consistore in Norwich, and he hath a broder in the
Tower, is master of the Mynt under Brice, called Bartilmew Rede, and a
nother broder is a goold smyth dwellyng in the Chepe Side called
------[11-1] Reede. And he is eyther loged with on of these, his breder,
or els at the Jorge in Lumbard Strete, or els at the Cok and the Bell at
Billinges gate, a brue hous, for the sei[d] gold smyth hath maried a
bruewyf, and kepeth the brue hous, (?) and he can good skylle to helpe
in this mater of the benefice of Oxned.

Also, Ric. Lee, who so ever shalbe [presented to the] benefice of Oxned,
he muste tell hym, I must pay xiiij. marc to the frutes, and ther for
shall he have [da]yes of payment to pay a marc azey[n] if he d[o] gete
hym frendschip. And also, Richard, at the makyng of this letter I mend
(?) to have ben sure (?) . . . . . . and now I in na . . . . . for if it
please my moder, me thynke it was well done, Sir William Storor had
. . . .

  [_The rest unintelligible._]

    [Footnote 9-1: [Add. Charter 17,251, B.M.] It is sufficiently
    evident that the date of this paper must be later than the
    24th February, 1479. It appears to be a set of memoranda or
    instructions by William Paston, addressed to his servant Richard
    Lee. The MS. is a small roll of paper very mutilated and partly
    illegible from the effect of damp.]

    [Footnote 9-2: St. Matthias’ Day (not St. Matthew’s) is meant.]

    [Footnote 9-3: Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury.]

    [Footnote 10-1: Crossed out in MS.]

    [Footnote 10-2: Afterwards Attorney-General to Henry VII. He was
    Reader of Lincoln’s Inn in Lent, 18 Edward IV.]

    [Footnote 10-3: Blank in MS.]

    [Footnote 11-1: Blank in original.]


944

EDMUND ALYARD TO MARGARET PASTON[11-2]

_To his worshepful mastres, Mastres Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1479 / MARCH 4]

Right worshepful mastres, I recommande me unto yow as lowly as I kan,
thankyng yow for your goodnes at all tymis; God graunt me to deserve it,
and do that may plese yow.

As for your son Water, his labor and lernyng hathe be, and is, yn the
Faculte of Art, and is well sped there yn, and may be Bacheler at soche
tyme as shall lyke yow, and then to go to lawe. I kan thynk it to his
preferryng, but it is not good he know it on to the tyme he shal
chaunge; and as I conceyve ther shal non have that exibeshyon to the
Faculte of Lawe. Therfore meve ze the executores that at soche tyme as
he shal leve it, ye may put a nother yn his place, soche as shal lyke
you to prefer. If he shal go to law, and be made Bacheler of Art be
fore, and ye wolle have hym hom this yere, then may he be Bacheler at
Mydsomor, and be with yow yn the vacacion, and go to lawe at Mihelmas.
Qwhat it shal lyke yow to commande me yn this or eny odir, ye shal have
myn service redy.

I pray yow be the next masenger to send me your entent, that swech as
shal be necessary may be purveyid yn seson. And Jesu preserve yow.

At Oxinforth, the iiij. day of March.

  Your scoler,

  EDMUND ALYARD.

    [Footnote 11-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It appears by subsequent
    letters that Walter Paston actually took a degree at Oxford at
    Midsummer, and it will be seen by next letter, which is dated by
    its endorsement, that he must have done so in 1479--the year of
    his death.]


945

WALTER PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[12-1]

_To hys ryth reverend broder, Sir John Paston, at Caster Hall, in
Norfolk._

[Sidenote: 1479 / MAY 22]

After all dw reverens and recomendacions, likyth yt yow to understond
that I reseyvyd a letter fro my broder John, where by I understod that
my moder and yow wold know what the costes of my procedyng schold be.
I sent a letter to my broder John, certyfyyng my costes, and the causys
why that I wold procede; but as I have sent word to my moder, I purpose
to tary now tyll yt be Mychylmas, for yf I tary tyll than, sum of my
costys schall be payyd; for I supposed, whan that I sent the letter to
my broder John, that the Qwenys broder[12-2] schold have procedyd at
Mydsomer, but he woll tary now tyll Michylmas; but as I send word to my
moder, I wold be Inceptor be fore Mydsomer, and there fore I besechyd
her to send me sum mony, for yt woll be sum cost to me, but not mych.

And, syr, I besech yow to send me word what answer ye have of the
Buschopp of Wynchester for that mater whych ye spak to hym of for me
whan I was with yow at London. I thowth for to have had word there of or
thys tyme. I wold yt wold come, for owr fyndyng of the Buschopp of
Norwych begynnyth to be slake in payment. And yf ye know not whath thys
term menyth, ‘Inceptor,’ Master Edmund, that was my rewler at Oxforth,
berar here of, kan tell yow, or ellys any oder gradwat.

Also I pray yow send me word what ys do with the hors I left at Totnam,
and whyder the man be content that I had yt of, or nat. Jesu preserve
yow to Hys pleswre and to yowr most hartys desyyr.

Wretyn at Oxforth, the Saturday next after Ascensyon of Yowr Lord.

  WALTER PASTON.

    [Footnote 12-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is endorsed
    in a contemporary hand, apparently Sir John Paston’s own, ‘anno
    xix^o,’ showing that it was written in the nineteenth year of
    Edward IV.]

    [Footnote 12-2: Lionel Woodville, afterwards Bishop of Salisbury.]


946

WALTER PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[13-1]

_To hys ryth trusty and hartyly belovyd broder, John Paston, abydyng at
the Georg, at Powlys Qwharfe, in London, be this letter delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1479 / JUNE 30]

Rygth worchypfull and hartyly belovyd broder, I recomaund me on to yow,
desyeryng feythfoly to here of yowr prosperyte, qwhych God preserve,
thankyng yow of dyverse letterys that yow sent me. In the last letter
that yow sent to me, ye wryt that yow schold have wryt in the letter
that yow sent by Master Brown, how that I schold send yow word what tyme
that I schold procede, but ther was non such wrytyng in that letter. The
letter is yet to schew, and yf yow come to Oxon, ye schal see the
letter, and all the leterys that yow sent me sythynnys I came to Oxon.

And also Master Brown had that same tyme mysch mony in a bage, so that
he durst nat bryng yt with hym, and that same letter was in that same
bage, and he had for gete to take owt the letter, and he sent all to
geder by London, so that yt was the next day after that I was maad
Bachyler or than the letter cam, and so the fawt was not in me.

And yf ye wyl know what day I was maad Baschyler, I was maad on Fryday
was sevynyth, and I mad my fest on the Munday after. I was promysyd
venyson a geyn my fest of my Lady Harcort, and of a noder man to, but I
was deseyvyd of both; but my gestes hewld them plesyd with such mete as
they had, blyssyd be God, Hoo have yow in Hys kepyng. Amen.

Wretyn at Oxon, on the Wedenys day next after Seynt Peter.

  W. PASTON.

    [Footnote 13-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] _See_ preliminary note to
    Letter 944, p. 11, note 2.]


947

ABSTRACT[14-1]

[Sidenote: 1479 / JULY 7]

Bill witnessing the delivery of plate by Geoffrey Hunt on behalf of
William Paston to John Davy and Alice, his wife, late wife of John
Gygges of Burnham, 7 July, 19 Edw. IV. The parcels are:--‘A round salt
covered, parcel gilt at the borders, weighing 19 oz. 1½ qr., and also 6
silver spoons, square sharp knoppys, weighing 5 oz. 3 qr. 1 dwt.’; which
Davy and his wife engage to keep safely, and redeliver to William Paston
or Geoffrey Hunt before the feast of St. Faith next coming.

  [_Two seals._]

    [Footnote 14-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


948

ABSTRACT[14-2]

WILLIAM PASTON TO THOMAS LYNSTED

[Sidenote: 1479 / JULY 11]

Hears that he has felled wood and firs, etc. ‘Also Jullis hath do made
saw (?) zattes.’ Desires him to ‘find the means that the young spring
may be saved, and the wood fenced. . . . . And also let me be answered
both for the old payment and the new of wood sale.’

11 July.

_P.S._--‘If Jullis have made a gate, it is the better for the spring,’
etc.

  [The MS. is a very illegible note in William Paston’s hand, written
  on a small scrap of paper, and endorsed ‘A letter to Thomas
  Linsti[d], the ---- (_blank_) day of Julii, anno xix. E.
  iiij^{ti}.’]

    [Footnote 14-2: _Ibid._]


949

WILLIAM PASTON TO HENRY WARYNS[15-1]

[Sidenote: 1479 / JULY 19]

Harry Waryns, I grete you well, and I thanke you for youre labour. And
as for the tenauntez of Knapton, I understand by youre writing that they
take non oder consideration to my sendyng but that I call so fast on my
fee, for cause they thynke that I am aferd lest I shuld have it no
longer; and as for that, I pray yow tell them for ther ungentilnes I
woll have my fee of them, and in that maner and in non oder place; and
ferthermor I shall fynd the mene that they shall paye it more hastely
here after. And as for the money that they offyr to pay at the fest of
Advincula Sancti Petri, receyve ye it off them and I shall assign one to
receyve it azen of yow. As for the delivere of the catell, I fele be
zowr wrytyng they will non sounar pay it thow ther catell shuld dye ffor
ffawte off mete. Wer for, affor the money be paid I putt that in zour
discresseon wheder ze will deliver them or nay; as ze do I hold me
content.

Also as for Thomas Child, I understand be zour wrytyng he will not seale
the indenture be cawse ther is no some of mony sertayne ne days of
payment sett in the indentur; and as for that, I will neyther sett some
nor days after his will; and if he will nat seale that, he shall never
seale none for me; and at last I am sure he shall sell. I send zow azen
the same indenture that ze sent me, that ze may kepe it still as long as
Thomas Chyld abyde now at Paston, in aventure the casse may hap that he
will sell yt herafter; and yff he be on departid, than send me both the
indenture[s] to London be some massenger. As for Waryn Kynge, wer I
understand be zour wrytyn that he seyth he delyver me all evydens,
I understand not that; and as for rentall I am sure he deliver me none,
and yff so be that he can make the rentall be hart, I wold he did make
on [_one_], for it war necessare for me; for I understand be zow that
ther was no rent gaderid this xv. ar xvj. zer for defallte off a
rentall; and therfor yt is I had a call on the prior of Bromholm for the
xxx. comb malt that ze toke hym. Wrytyn at Norton the xix. day of Jull’

  By

  W. PASTON.

  Endorsed by the writer:--

  ‘A letter to Harry Waryns the xix day of Jule, A^o xix E. iiij^ti
  by John Ancell off Paston.’

    [Footnote 15-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 133.] The year of this letter
    appears by the endorsement. The MS. is a draft, partly in a
    clerk’s hand, corrected and continued in that of William Paston
    himself.]


950

WILL OF WALTER PASTON[16-1]

[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG. 18]

In Dei nomine, Amen. Ego, Walterus Paston, clericus, in bona et sana
memoria existens, condo testamentum meum apud Norwicum xviiij^o die
mensis Augusti in hunc modum. Inprimis lego animam meam Deo Omnipotenti,
Beatæ Mariæ et omnibus Sanctis, et corpus meum ad sepeliendum in
ecclesia Sancti Petri de Hundegate, coram ymagine Sancti Johannis
Baptistæ. Item, lego summo altari præfatæ ecclesiæ, iij_s._ iiij_d._
Item, lego reparacioni ecclesiæ supradictæ, ij_s._ vj_d._ Item, Fratri
Johanni Somerton, bachalaureo, v_s._ Item, lego Magistro Edmundo unam
togam penulatam cum manicis de _mynkys_. Item, lego Roberto Wulff unam
togam viridem ----[16-2] cum _chamelet_. Item, lego Roberto Holand,
filio spirituali, togam meam curtam. Item, lego Magistro Roberto Hollar
unam togam penulatam cum _gray_. Item, lego Johanni Parker mantellum
meum rubeum. Item, lego Magistro Roberto Hollere unum pulvinar vocatum
_le bolstar_. Item, lego Magistro Edmundo Alyard unum pulvinar. Item,
lego Ricardo Richardson unam togam penulatam ad manus cum _menyver_.
Item, volo quod residuum bonorum meorum in Oxonia sit ad usum Magistri
Edmundi Alyard, sic quod solvat . . . .[17-1] Johanni Skelton et Thomæ
Coco. Item, volo quod oves meæ, quas habet Willelmus Bataly senior in
villa de Mawteby, dividantur equaliter inter fratrem meum Edmundum
Paston, et sororem meam Annam Yelverton, et sororem meam Margeriam
Paston, uxorem fratris mei Johannis Paston. Item, lego terras et
tenementa manerij mei de Cressyngham, si possum dare, fratri meo Johanni
Paston armigero, sibi et hæredibus suis, sub condicione ista, quod si
contingat fratrem meum prædictum, Johannem Paston, esse hæredem patris
mei, quod nullo modo habeat terras et tenementa prædicta, sed quod
frater meus Edmundus Paston habeat terras et tenementa prædicta sibi et
suis hæredibus. Residuum vero bonorum non legatorum lego et do
disposicioni executorum meorum, ut et ipsi fideliter disponant pro anima
mea.

Hujus autem testamenti mei executores condo per præsentes, fratrem meum
Johannem Paston, armigerum, pro ista patria, et Magistrum Edmundum
Alyard pro bonis meis remanentibus Oxoniæ.

    [Footnote 16-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It will be seen by the
    next letter that Walter Paston was dead before the 21st August
    1479. This will was probably drawn up on the very day he died, or
    just before.]

    [Footnote 16-2: Blank in MS.]

    [Footnote 17-1: Here occurs a short word, which is to me
    unintelligible. It seems to be written ‘p^{i}uli.’]

  [[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG. 18
  _printed as shown, but text of letter says “xviiij” (19)_]]


951

WILLIAM PASTON’S PLATE[17-2]

[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG. 19]

This indenture made the xix. day of August, anno xix^o [witnesseth][17-3]
that I, Richard Lee, have delivered to Mr. John Russhe thes parcellis
folowyng of plate [and][17-4] of silver:--

  First, a bason and an ewer with iij. combis in a skochyn.
  Item, a silver potte.
  A layer of silver, parte gilte with an acorne on the knoppe.
  A gilte stonding couppe ponsid with a cover.
  A chasid pece with a cover aparte gilte.
  ij. playne pecys.
  ij. deppe disshis.
  x. sponys.
  A white playne coppe with a starre in the botom with a cover.
  A standing coppe gilte with a cover.
  A candellstik of silver with a sokette.
  A trevett of silver.
  A salt of silver with a brokyn cover.
  A cover for a playn pece, the knoppe gravid with armys.

  RICHARD LEE.

  _Endorsed_--‘Plate of William Paston left with John Russhe, the xiij.
  day of Sept., a^o xix^o.’

    [Footnote 17-2: [Add. MS. 27,451, f. 2, B.M.]]

    [Footnote 17-3: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 17-4: Erased.]


952

[EDMUND PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[18-1]]

[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG. 21]

Suer dydynges arn com to Norwyche that my grandam is dyssessyd, whom God
assoyle. Myn uncle had a messenger zesterday that she shuld not escape,
and this day cam a nother at suche tyme as we were at masse for my
brother Water, whom God assoyle! Myn uncle was comyng to have offered,
but the last messenger retornyd hym hastely, so that he toke hys hors
incontynent to enforme more of owr hevynes. My syster ys delyverd, and
the chyld passyd to God, Who send us Hys grace.

Dokkyng told me sekretly that for any hast myn uncle shuld ryde by my
Lady of Norffolk to have a iij. skore persons, whyther it is to convey
my grandham hyder or nowght he cowde not sey; I deme it is rather to put
them in possessyon of some of her londes.

Wretyn the Saterdaye the xxi. daye of August, anno E. iiij^ti xix^o.

    [Footnote 18-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is neither
    signed nor addressed, but is in the handwriting of Edmund Paston,
    and is endorsed by John Paston the younger, ‘Dies mortis A. P.’]


953

ABSTRACT[19-1]

MANOR OF MARLINGFORD

[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG. 26]

Declaration by Robert Mill, John Hobbes, John Claryngton, Thomas Davy,
John Brygge, John Watyr, and William Parson, tenants of the manor of
Marlyngford, before the Abbot of St. Benet’s, John [R]adclyf
Fywater,[19-2] Mr. John Smyth, Robert Ippeswell, William Lomnor, John
Paston, Esq., William Yelverton, senior, John Coke, alderman, William
Bastard, gentleman, and William Fuller, that they have always held of
the manor in the name of Agnes Paston, daughter, and one of the heirs of
Edmund Bery, Knt., and in her name only, till Saturday [21 Aug.] before
St. Bartholomew Apostle, 19 Edw. IV., when her son, William Paston,
desired them to attorn to him without showing writing or evidence.

Done in the parlour of John Cooke, 26 Aug., 19 Edw. IV. _Signed_:
‘Thomas, Abbot of Seynt Benettes of Hulme.’--‘J. Radclyff
Fytzwauter.’--‘John Smyth, clerk.’--‘Robert Ipeswell.’--‘Will.
Lomnor.’--‘W. Yelverton.’--‘John Cook.’--‘Will’m Bastard.’--‘Will.
Fuller.’

    [Footnote 19-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 19-2: John Radcliff, son and heir of Sir John Radcliff,
    called Lord Fitzwalter in No. 450 (vol. iii.). He was summoned to
    Parliament as Lord Fitzwalter in the first year of Henry VII.]


954

MEMORANDA[19-3]

[Sidenote: 1479 / AUG.]

Memorandum, uppon the presse at the ferther ende is a box with ij. or
iij. bondellis with evydence off Oxenhed and Hawteyn.

Memorandum, that ther is rollis tytelyd uppon them ‘Contra Willelmum
Pas[ton],’ and they be owther uppon the presse, or on the cowntre, or on
the shelffe by the cowntre, or ellys in the cowntre on . . . that syde
next the shelffe.

To enquire, off myn, oncle William, off Jane, off my grauntd[ames]
wylle, and whoo wrot itt, and whether she be buried or noo, and who were
present at hyr wylle makyng, and iff she spoke . . . . . owte off her
londes.

Inquire--

  Off the Kynge,
  The Chaunceler,
  Milorde Chamberleyn,
  Sir Thomas Mongomere,
  Mi Lorde Cardynall,
  Master Bele, and hys clerke, ffor my faderes wille.

    [Footnote 19-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] These memoranda are in
    the handwriting of Sir John Paston. From the inquiry whether Agnes
    Paston was yet buried the date is evidently in August 1479.]

  [[To enquire, off myn, oncle William
  _text unchanged: superfluous comma after “myn”?_]]


955

RICHARD CALLE TO MARGARET PASTON[20-1]

[Sidenote: 1479, or earlier]

Plesith it your mastresship to witte that I sende you a boxe with
evidence of Baktons londes, weche plesith it you to delyver to my
master, Sir John, so that I may have my money that is behynde. And as
for Sporle, I sende you an endenture of the bercars[20-2] and iij.
obligacions eche of v. marke. And as for any endenture of the wode sale
I made non, but a noote breefely of the effecte, wech I sende you, as I
tolde my mastre at Cristemas, and that tyme he seide to me he was the
better plesid, and so I ded no more therto; and an obligacion of C_li._
weche they be bounde to hym to performe ther ther covinauntes; weche
remayneth in the handes of the veker of Sporle. And I send you also ij.
billes of the parcell of the wode sale, bothe the wynter sale and the
somer sale, wherof the veker of Sporle and William Halman have the other
parties of them, as he comaunded hym selfe at the begynnyng. And lete my
countrelle doo what hym liste. I fynd hym a trewe man; he dothe as he
hath reported that he shuld go on my harond, and so I undrestond from
the[m] he hath do; but thow I have lost a frende of hym in that quarter,
I have mo frendes in that contre the[n] hee, etc. Mastres, it were goode
to remembre your stuffe of heryng nough this fisshyng tyme. I have goten
me a frende in Lestoftot to helpe to purvey me of an vij. or viij.
barell, and shal not stonde me upon above vj_s._ viij_d._ a barell, so
that he may have money nough in the begynnyng, ye shal do more nough
with xl_s._ then ye shal do at Cristemes with v. marke. The fisshyng at
Yermouth wol not be so goode as it wolbe at Leystoft, for the haven wol
not prove yette, etc. Almyghty God kepe you. Wrete this daye.

  Be your servaunt, R. C.

    [Footnote 20-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is not
    addressed, but seems to have been intended for Margaret Paston.
    The date is not very material, but as it mentions Sir John Paston,
    it cannot be later than 1479, the year in which he died. Perhaps
    it is about the year 1472. _See_ Nos. 819, 820.]

    [Footnote 20-2: Barkers, or tanners to whom the bark of the woods
    had been sold.]


956

SIR JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[21-1]

_To the ryght worshypfull mestresse, Margret Paston, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1479 / OCT. 29]

Please it yow to weet, that I have ben heer at London a xiiij. nyght,
wheroff the ffyrst iiij. dayes I was in suche ffeer off the syknesse,
and also ffownde my chambr and stuffe nott so clene as I demyd, whyche
troblyd me soor; and as I tolde yow at my departyng, I was nott weell
monyed, ffor I hadde nott paste x. marke, wheroff I departyd xl_s._ to
be delyveryd off my olde bedfelawe; and then I rode be yonde Donstaple,
and ther spake with on off my cheffe witnessis, whyche promysed me to
take labor, and to gete me wryghtyngs towchyng thys mater bytwyen me and
the Duke of Suffolk,[21-2] and I rewardyd hym xx_s._; and then, as I
informyd yow, I payed v. marke incontynent uppon my comyng hyddr to
replegge owte my gowne off velwett and other geer.

And then I hopyd to have borowyd some off Townesend, and he hath ffoodyd
me[21-3] fforthe evyrsynys, and in effecte I cowde have at the most, and
at the sonest yisterdaye xx_s._ wherffor I beseche yow to purveye me
C_s._ and also to wryght to Pekok, that he purveye me as moche, C_s._
whyche I supose that he hathe gaddryd at Paston and other places, by
thys tyme; ffor with owte I have thys x_li._, as God helpe me, I ffer I
shalle doo butt litell goode in noo mater, nor yitt I woote nott howe to
come home, but iff I have it.

This geer hathe troblyd me so, that itt hathe made me moor than halffe
seke, as God helpe me.

Item, I undrestande that myn oncle William hathe made labor to th’
Exchetor, and that he hathe bothe a wrytte off _essend._ clowsyth extr.;
and also a _supercedeas_. I have wretyn to the Exchetor ther in off myn
entent, iff myn oncle hadde hys wyll in that, yitt sholde he be never
the nerre the londe, butt in effecte he shold have thys advantage,
whyche is behovefull ffor a weyke mater to have a colour, or a clooke,
or a botrase.

But on Tywesdaye I was with the Bysshop off Hely,[22-1] whyche shewyth
hymselffe goode and worshypfull; and he seyde that he sholde sende to
myn oncle William, that he sholde nott procede in no suche mater, till
that he speke with hym; and moor ovyr that he sholde cawse hym to be
heer hastelye; in whyche mater is no remedy as nowe, but iff it wer soo,
that the Exchetor, iff he be entretyd to sytte by myn oncle William,
whyche percase he shall nott, that iff my brother John and Lomnor have
knowleche off the daye, and they myght be ther; Lomnor can geve evydence
i now in that mater with owte the boke; and mor ovyr that they see bothe
the letter and the other noote, that I sente to the Exchetor, and with
helpe off the Exchetor all myght be as beste is; and iff my brother and
Lomnor take labor her in, I shal recompence ther costs.

Wretyn in haste with schort advisement on the Frydaye next Seynt Symonds
and Jude, anno E. iiij^ti xix^o.

Late my brother John se thys bille, for he knoweth mor off thys mater.

  JOHN PASTON, K.

    [Footnote 21-1: [From Fenn, ii. 276.]]

    [Footnote 21-2: John de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 21-3: Fenn reads ‘ffoodyd ne,’ and in the modern copy
    ‘fooded not forth,’ of which some fanciful explanations are
    suggested in a footnote. The true reading ought certainly to be
    ‘me’ and not ‘ne,’ the meaning evidently being ‘he has put me off
    ever since.’ ‘To fode out with words’ is an expression which, as
    Halliwell informs us, occurs in Skelton, Harrington, etc.]

    [Footnote 22-1: John Morton, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,
    and Cardinal.]


957

JOHN PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[23-1]

_To Syr John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV. 6]

Syr, aftyr all dwtes of recomendacyon, pleasyt to undyrstand, that,
acordyng to your lettre sent me by Wyllson, Lomnore and I mett at
Norwyche and drew ought a formable bylle ought of your, and send it ayen
to th’Exchetore Palmer by my brodyr Edmund, whyche had an other erand in
to that contre to spek with H. Spylman, to get hys good wyll towardes
the bargayn lyek to be fynyshed hastyly betwyx Mastres Clyppysby and
hym. And, syr, at the delyvere of the bylle of inquisicyon to
th’Exchetour, my brodyr Edmund told hym that accordyng to your wryghtyng
to me, I spak with myn oncle William, and told hym that I undyrstood by
yow that my Lord of Elye had aswell desyred hym in wryghtyng as you by
mouthe, that non of you shold swe to have the inquisycion fond aftyr
your intentys tyll other weyes of pese wer takyn betwyx you; wherfor my
brodyr Edmund desyred hym that with ought myn oncle labord to have it
fond for hym, ellys that he shold not procede for yow; but th’Exchetour
answerd hym that he wold fynd it for you, aftyr your byll, of hys owne
autorite; and so it was fond. But, syr, ye must remembre that my Lord of
Ely desyred myn oncle as well as you to surcease, as I put myn oncle in
knowlage, and myn oncle at the fyrst agreid that he wold make no more
sute a bought it, in trust that ye wold do the same, acordyng to my Lord
of Elys desyer; wherfor ye had ned to be ware that th’Exchetor skyppe
not from you, when he comyth to London, and sertyfye it, or ye spek with
hym. Th’Exchetor shalbe at London by Twysdaye or Wednysday next comyng,
at John Leeis house, for he shall ryd forwardys as on Monday next comyng
be tymys, &c.

Syr, your tenauntes at Crowmer sey that they know not who shalbe ther
lord; they marvayll that ye nor no man for yow hathe not yet ben there.
Also, when I was with myn oncle, I had a longe pystyll of hym, that ye
had sent Pekok to Paston, and comandyd the tenauntes ther that they
shold pay non areragys to hym, but if [_unless_] they wer bond to hym by
obligacyon for the same; myn oncle seythe it was other wyse apoyntyd be
for the arbytrorys; they thought, he seythe, as well my Mastyr
Fytzwalter as other, that he shold receyve that as it myght be gadryd;
but now he seythe, that he wottyth well some shall renne away, and some
shall wast it, so that it is nevyr lyek to be gadryd, but lost, and so I
trow it is lyek to be of some of the dettors, what for casuelte of dethe
and thes other causes befor rehersyd; wherfor me thynkyth if it were
apoyntyd befor the arbytrors that he shold receyve theym, as he seythe,
it wer not for you to brek it, or ellys if he be pleyn executor to my
grauntdam, then also he ought to have it. I spek lyek a blynd man, do ye
as ye thynk, for I was at no syche apoyntment befor th’arbytrors, nor I
know not whethyr he is executor to my grauntdam or not, but by hys
seying.

Also, syr, ye must of ryght, consyderyng my brodyr Edmundys diligence in
your maters, sythe your departyng, helpe hym forwardys to myn oncle Syr
George Brown, as my brodyr Edmund preyid yow in hys lettyr that he sent
on to yow by Mondys sone of Norwyche, dwellyng with Thomas Jenney, that
myn oncle Syr George may gett to my brodyr Edmund of the Kyng the
wardshepp of John Clyppysby, son and heyer to John Clyppysby,[24-1] late
of Owby, in the conte of Norffolk, Sqwyr, dwryng the nonnage of my Lord
and Lady of York,[24-2] thow it cost iiij. or v. mark the swte. Let myn
oncle Syr George be clerk of the haniper, and kepe the patent, if it be
grantyd, tyll he have hys mone, and that shall not be longe to.

Myn oncle Syr George may enforme the Kyng for trowthe, that the chyld
shall have no lond duryng hys yong modyrs lyff, and ther is no man her
that wyll mary with hym withought they have some lond with hym, and so
the gyft shall not be gret that the Kyng shold geve hym; and yet I trow
he shold get the modyr by that meane, and in my conseyt the Kyng dothe
but ryght if he graunt my brodyr Edmund Clyppysbys son in recompense for
takyng my brodyr Edmundes son, otherwyse callyd Dyxsons, the chyldys
fadyr being alyve. Dyxson is ded, God have hys sowle, Whom I beseche to
send you your most desyred joye.

Wretyn at Norwyche, on Seynt Leonardes Day.

  J. PASTON.

Syr, it is told me that Nycolas Barlee, the Scyuer, hathe takyn an axion
of dett ayenst me thys terme. I prey yow let Whetley or some body spek
with hym, and lete hym wet that if he swe me softly thys terme, that he
shall be payed or the nexte terme be at an end. It is a bought vj_li._,
and in feythe he shold have had it or thys tyme, and our threshers of
Sweynsthorp had not dyed upp; and if I myght have payed it hym a yer
ago, as well as I trust I shall sone aftyr Crystmass, I wold not for
xij_li._ have brokyn hym so many promessys as I have.

Also, syr, I prey yow send me by the next man that comyth fro London ij.
pottys of tryacle of Jenne,--they shall cost xvj_d._,--for I have spent
ought that I had with my yong wyf, and my yong folkys, and my sylff, and
I shall pay hym that shall bryng hem to me, and for hys caryage. I pray
you lett it be sped.

The pepyll dyeth sore in Norwyche, and specyally abought my house, but
my wyff and my women come not ought, and fle ferther we can not; for at
Sweynsthorpe, sythe my departyng thens, they have dyed, and ben syke nye
in every house of the towne.

    [Footnote 23-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It will be seen from the
    contents that this letter must have been written after the receipt
    of the last, or of one to the same effect addressed to John
    Paston.]

    [Footnote 24-1: The writer probably intended to say ‘son and heir
    to William Clippesby,’ who died about this time. His widow
    Catherine, the daughter of John Spelman, Esq., of Stow Bekerton,
    soon afterwards married Edmund Paston.]

    [Footnote 24-2: Richard, Duke of York, son of Edward IV., at this
    time a child of seven years old, and Anne Mowbray, daughter of the
    late Duke of Norfolk, to whom he was married in 1478.]


958

WILLIAM PASTON TO ROBERT WALSH[26-1]

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV. 22]

Yet wold I tary, all be yt I have taryd your comyg this halff yer, for I
deme her suche men as schall well undyrstond myn titill good; yff any
man have good tytyll I am suyr that myn is gode. I dar well juperde to
take a dystres, wedyr they come or nat, and so I wyll ze know. Wer for,
in so much as I left myn distress for iowr dysyr, so that I be answerid
off myn mony acordyng to myn ryth, ar else send me answer, one ar oder
[_one or other_], and lett me take the avantage that the Kynge lawys
will zeff me be dystress qweche I have delayed, me thynk to long, for
any thank that I have.

Wretyn at Norwich, the xxij. Novembre.

    [Footnote 26-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter or fragment
    of a letter is a corrected draft in William Paston’s hand, and is
    endorsed by him:--‘A letter to Roberd Walsche of Colby, the ----
    day off Novembre, anno xix.’]


959

JULLYE TO HIS FATHER[26-2]

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV.]

Well beloved fader, my master prayed you that ye will sende knowlach be
my broder as sone as these men be come to Knapton, and that ye may laye
a weche to knowe ho sone they be come, and sende me be your sone ar else
be some other trusty man; and I have take your son a grote for his
laubour. And do this in hast; for wheder they com or nat I wille take a
distresse ther, and thatt will abide[26-3] till I knowe the dealing of
them this ij. ar iij. dayes for to know wheder they wille come or nat,
and ther after shall I be demeaned.

  _Endorsed in William Paston’s hand_--A letter fro ----[26-4] Jullye,
  clark of Sent Edmundes, to his fadyr, to North Walsham, the ----[26-4]
  day Novembr’, anno xix.

    [Footnote 26-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 26-3: ‘Wer I lothe’ has been crossed through, and ‘thatt
    will abide’ written over.]

    [Footnote 26-4: Blanks in MSS.]


960

MANOR OF KNAPTON[27-1]

Mr. Thomas Pasche of Wynsowr toke the astate and retorne to the Dean and
Colage of Wynsowr _infra Castrum_.

And one ----[27-2] Holme, atornay off corte, is recognis (?) and was at
stat takyn.

Robert Walsch off Colby j. myl. et di’ fro Blyklyng is steward.

Here folow revys of Knapton:--

  Fro M. xvij. till xviij^o, Martyn Smyth.
  F[ro] M. xviij. till xix^o, Roberd Fraunk (?), his place bonde.
  Fro M. xix. till xx^o, Thomas Frank, his place fre.

    [Footnote 27-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This is a paper of
    memoranda in the handwriting of William Paston, endorsed ‘A mater
    tochyng Knapton for my fee.’]

    [Footnote 27-2: Blank in MS.]


961

CRESSINGHAM MANOR[27-3]

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV. 25]

Receyved at Cressingham, the Thirsday nex aftyr Seynt Edmund[27-4] at
the corte ther v_li._ x_s._ by the handes of me, John Paston, Sqwyer.

  Wherof payed to my modyr for costys don up on the berying of Walter
  Paston, and whyll he lay sek, and for the hyer of a man comyng with
  the seyd Water fro Oxenford xx_d._

    xxix_s._ xj_d._

  Item, payed to William Gybson for j. horse sadyll and brydyll lent
  to Water Paston by the seyd William,
    xvj_s._

  Item, gevyn the seyd man comyng fro Oxenford with the seyd Water by
  the handys of J. Paston,
    xx_d._

  Item, payed for dyvers thynges whyll Water Paston lay sek,
    iiij_d._

  Item, for the costes of John Paston rydyng to kepe the coort at
  Cressingham, _anno supradicto_, whych was iiij. dayes in doing,
  for the styward mygh not be ther at the day prefyxid,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

    [Footnote 27-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This paper is in the
    handwriting of John Paston the younger. The reference to the
    burial of Walter Paston proves it to be of the year 1479.]

    [Footnote 27-4: St. Edmund’s Day is the 20th November. The
    Thursday after it in 1479 was the 25th.]

  [[the seyd Water fro Oxenford
  _spelling “Water” unchanged_

  Item, payed to William Gybson ... xvj_s._
  _“s.” in plain (non-italic) type_]]


962

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[28-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull modyr, Margaret Paston, at Seynt Peter of
Hundgate._

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV.]

Ryght worchepfull modyr, aftyr all dwtes of humble recomendacyon, as
lowly as I can, I beseche yow of your dayly blyssyng and preyeres. And,
moder, John Clement, berer heroff, can tell yow, the mor pite is, if it
pleasyd God, that my brodyr is beryed in the Whyghte Fryers at London;
whych I thought shold not have ben, for I supposyd that he wold have ben
beryed at Bromholme, and that causyd me so sone to ryd to London to have
purveyd hys brynging hom, and if it had ben hys wylle to have leyn at
Bromholm, I had purposyd all the wey as I have redyn to have brought hom
my grauntdame[28-2] and hym to gedyrs; but that purpose is voyd as now.
But thys I thynke to do when I com to London to spek with my Lord
Chamberleyn,[28-3] and to wynne by hys meanys my Lord of Ely,[28-4] if I
can; and if I may by eny of ther meanys cause the Kyng to take my
servyse and my quarrell to gedyrs, I wyll, and I thynk that Sir George
Brown, Sir Jamys Radclyff, and other of myn aqueyntance, whyche wayte
most upon the Kyng, and lye nyghtly in hys chamber, wyll put to ther
good wyllys. Thys is my wey as yet. And, modyr, I beseche yow, as ye may
get or send eny messengers, to send me yowr avyse and my cosyn Lomeners
to John Leeis hows, taylere, with in Ludgate. I have myche more to
wryght, but myn empty hed wyll not let me remembre it.

Also, modyr, I prey that my brodyr Edmond may ryd to Marlyngforthe,
Oxenhed, Paston, Crowmer, and Caster, and all thes maners to entre in my
name, and to lete the tenants of Oxenhed and Marlyngfor know that I sent
no word to hym to take no mony of theym but ther attornement; wherfor he
wyll not, tyll he her fro me ayen, axe hem non, but lete hym comand
theym to pay to servaunts of myn oncles, nor to hymsylff, nor to non
othyr to hys use, in peyne of payment ayen to me. I thynk if ther shold
be eny money axid in my name, peraventure it wold make my Lady of
Norfolk ayenst me, and cause hyr to thynk I dellt more contrary to hyr
plesure than dyd my brodyr, whom God pardon of Hys gret mercy. I have
sent to entre at Stansted and at Orwellbery, and I have wretyn a bylle
to Anne Montgomery and Jane Rodon to make my Lady of Norffolk, if it
wyll be.

  Your sone and humble servaunt,

  J. PASTON.

    [Footnote 28-1: [From Fenn, ii. 280.] Sir John Paston died in
    London on the 15th November 1479, as Fenn informs us. I presume he
    had some authority for the precise date, which I have not seen.
    The inquisition _post mortem_ is not now to be found; but the writ
    to the Escheator still exists, and is dated 30 Nov., 19 Edw. IV.
    This letter refers not only to the burial of Sir John Paston, but
    also to the death of his grandmother Agnes. The year was one of
    great mortality.]

    [Footnote 28-2: Agnes, widow of William Paston the Judge.]

    [Footnote 28-3: William, Lord Hastings.]

    [Footnote 28-4: John Morton, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,
    and Cardinal, etc.]


963

WILLIAM LOMNOR TO JOHN PASTON[29-1]

_To the ryght worchypfull John Paston, Squyer, yn haste._

[Sidenote: 1479 / NOV. 28]

My Master Paston, I recomaunde me to yow, preyyng God to have mercy on
my master your brother sowle, to whom ye ar heyre, and also to my
mastras your grauntdam. Wherfore be th’avyse of my mastras your carful
moder, your brothere Edmund, on Sunday next before Sent Andrew, rod to
Marlyngforth, and before alle the tenauntez, examynid on James, kepere
ther for Will. Paston, where he was the weke next before Sent Andrew,
and there he seyd that he was not at Marlingforth from the Monday unto
the Thorday at evyn, and soo there was no man there but your brothers
man at the tyme of his decese; so be that your brothere dyyd sesid, and
your brothere E. bad your man kepe possession to your behoffe, and
warned the tenauntez to pay noo man, til ye hadde spoke them. So
mesemyth that ys a remyttir to your old taylyd titell; comon with your
concell. Forther, at afternoon he was at Oxned to understande how they
had doo, and Peris kepyd your brotheres possession at that tyme; and
your oncle his man was not there, but he assyned anothere pore man to be
ther. Whethere that contynuid the possession of W. Paston or not be
remembrid, &c.

And after the decese, &c., W. Paston sent the man that kepyd possession
to fore to entre and kepe possession, wheche was noo warent be tha
poyntment, for ye stande at your liberte as for ony apoyntment or
comunycacion hadde before, and soo men seme it wer good for yow to
stande at large til ye here more; yf ye myght have my Lord Chamberleyns
good faver and lordship, it were ryght expedyent. As for my Lord of Ely,
dele not wyth hym be owr avyse, for he woll move for trete, and elles be
displesid. Your brother Edmund sent to John Wymond, and he sent word he
wolle be a mene of trete, but wold take noo parte, and as I sopose that
was be Heydons avyse; for your uncle sent to me to be with hym, and also
the same man rodd to Heydon and Wymondham, &c. The brenger of this
letter can tell, for he was with your brothere E. at these placez.

Forther, my mastras your moder gretyth yow well, and sendyth yow her
blessyng, requiryng yow to come oute of that here [_air_] alsone as ye
may; and your brothere E. comaundid hym to yow, and he doth hys
dylygens, and parte for yow full well and saddely yn many behalvys, and
hath brought my maistras your wife to Topcrofte on Friday last, and they
fare all well there; and he yntendith to see my Master Fitz Water, whech
lythe at Freton, ner Long Stratton. And God be your gide yn all your
maters, and brenge yow sone home.

Wretyn at Norwyche, on Sonday at nyght next before Sent Andrew, and
delyverd on Monday next be the morwyn.

  Be your,

  W. LOMNOUR.

    [Footnote 29-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is apparent from the
    contents that this letter was written shortly after the decease of
    Sir John Paston in November 1479.]


964

ABSTRACT[31-1]

[WILLIAM PASTON TO ROBERT WALSH]

Thinks his dealing not very commendable, seeing that the writer is not
paid his fee, according to the promise made by him and Fouke of Knapton,
when they were with him at Norton. I had a distress and left it for your
sake, but you show no consideration for me, etc.

  [This is a draft in the handwriting of William Paston. To it is
  attached a small slip with these words, ‘A letter fro William Paston
  to Robert Walsch and Robert Fouk of Knapton.’]

    [Footnote 31-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


965

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[31-2]

_To my ryght worchepfull and most kynd modyr, Margarett Paston._

[Sidenote: 1479 / DEC.]

Ryght werchepfull modyr, aftyr all dutes of humble recomendacyon, as
lowly as I can, I beseche yow of your dayly blessyng and preyer. Pleasyt
yow to undyrstand that wher as ye wyllyd me by Poiness to hast me ought
of the heyer that I am in, it is so that I must pwt me in God, for her
must I be for a season, and in good feyth I shall never, whyll God
sendyth me lyff, dred mor dethe than shame; and thankyd be God, the
sykness is well seasyd here, and also my besyness puttyth awey my fere.
I am drevyn to labore in lettyng of th’execucyon of myn unkynd onclys
entent, wher in I have as yet non other dyscorage, but that I trust in
God he shall fayle of it.

I have spokyn with my Lord of Ely[32-1] dyvers tymys, whyche hathe put
me in serteynte by hys woord, that he wyll be with me ayenst myn oncle
in iche mater that I can shewe that he entendyth to wrong me in; and he
wold fayne have a resonable end betwyx us, wher to he wyll helpe, as he
seythe. And it is serteyn my brodyr, God have hys soule, had promysed to
a byde the reule of my Lord Chamberleyn[32-2] and of my Lord Ely; but I
am not yett so far forthe, nor not wyll be, tyll I know my Lord
Chamberleyns intent, and that I purpose to do to morow, for then I thynk
to bewith hym, with Godes leve. And sythe it is so that God hathe
purveyd me to be the solysytore of thys mater, I thank Hym of Hys grace
for the good lordes, mastrys, and frendys that He hathe sent me, whyche
have perfytely promysyd me to take my cause as ther owne, and those
frendes be not a fewe.

And, modyr, as I best can and may, I thank yow and my cosyn Lomenore of
the good avyse that ye have sent me, and I shall aplye me to do ther
aftyr. Also, modyr, I beseche you on my behalf to thank myn cosyn
Lomnorre for the kindness that he hathe shewyd on to me in gevyng of hys
answer to myn onclys servaunt, whyche was with hym.

Modyr, I wryght not so largely to yow as I wold do, for I have not most
leyser; and also when I have ben with my Lord Chamberleyn, I purpose not
to tery longe aftyr in London, but to dresse me to yow wardes; at whyche
tyme I trust I shall brynge yow more serteynte of all the fordell
[_advantage_] that I have in my besyness then I can as yett wryght.

I am put in serteynte by my most specyall good mastyr, my Mastyr of the
Rollys,[32-3] that my Lord of Ely is, and shal be bettyr lord to me then
he hathe shewyd as yet, and yet hathe he delt with me ryght well and
honourably.

Modyr, I beseche yow that Pekok may be sent to purvey me as myche money
as is possybyll for hym to make ayenst my comyng home, for I have myche
to pay her in London, what for the funerall costes, dettes, and legattes
that must be content in gretter hast then shalbe myn ease. Also I wold
the ferme barly in Flegge, as well as at Paston, if ther be eny, wer
gadryd, and iff it may be resonably sold, then to be sold or putt to the
maltyng; but I wold at Caster that it were ought of the tenauntes handys
for thynges that I here (kepe ye consell thys fro Pekok and all folkys),
whyche mater I shall appese, if God wyll geve me leve.

    [Footnote 31-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident from the
    contents that this letter was written shortly after the death of
    Sir John Paston. The year 1479 was a year of great mortality, in
    which the Paston family lost three of its members. The letter is
    not signed, but is in John Paston’s hand.]

    [Footnote 32-1: John Morton, Bishop of Ely.]

    [Footnote 32-2: Lord Hastings.]

    [Footnote 32-3: Robert Morton.]


966

JOHN PASTON AND HIS UNCLE WILLIAM[33-1]

[Sidenote: After 1479]

Thes be th’enjuryes and wrongys done by William Paston to John Paston,
hys nevew.

Fyrst, the maners of Marlyngforthe, Stansted, and Horwellbery wes gev[en
to] William Paston, Justyce, and to Agnes, hys wyff, and to th’eyers of
ther tw . . . . to whom the seyd John Paston is cosyn and heyer, that is
to sey, son to John, son and heyer to the seyd William and Agnes.

Item, wher the [_seyd William Paston was seasyd of the maner of ----_],
Ed. Clere with other infeofyd to the use of the seyd Will[iam][33-2] and
of hys heyres, the whyche William made hys wyll that th[e said Agnes],
hys [wife], shold have the seyd maner for terme of hyr lyff. And aftyr
th[at he] dyed, and the seyd Agnes occupyed for terme of hyr seyd lyff
. . . . of the seyd feoffes the seyd maner; and aftyrwardes the seyd
. . . . . . Afftyr whoys dethe Sir John Paston, Knyght, as cosyn and
heyer to t[he said William], in to the seyd maner entred, and dyed with
ought issue of hys bodye. . . . . . John as brodyr and heyer to the seyd
Sir John, [_and cosyn and heyer is lett . ._],[34-1] . . seyd maner
entred, and is lettyd to take the profytys of the same by . . . . of the
maners of Marlyngforthe, Stansted, and Horwelbery befor r . . . . by the
meanys of the seyd Wylliam.

    [Footnote 33-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that this
    paper was drawn up some time after the death of Sir John Paston in
    1479. It is in his brother John’s handwriting.]

    [Footnote 33-2: ‘Ed. Clere--Will[iam].’--These words are
    interlined in place of the words in italics within brackets, which
    are struck through.]

    [Footnote 34-1: These words are struck through.]


967

JOHN PASTON TO ----[34-2]

[Sidenote: 1479-80]

Sir, I pray yow that ye will send sum chyld to my Lord of Bukingham
place, and to the Crown, wich as I conseive is called Gerardes Hall, in
Bred Stret, to inquere whedir I have any answer of my letter sent to
Caleys, whech ye know off; and that ye will remembre my brotheris ston,
so that it myth be mad er I cumm ageyn, and that it be klenly wrowgth.
It is told me that the man at Sent Bridis is no klenly portrayer;
[the]rfor I wold fayn it myth be portrayed be sum odir man, and he to
grave it up.

Sir, it is informyd sum personis in this cuntre that ye know that the
frere will sew a nodir delegaci fro Rome, direkt to sum byschop of
Ingland, to amend his mater, &c.; and how be it that it may not gretly
hurt, yet the seyd persones, &c., wold not he shuld have his entent, in
asmoch as his suggestion is untrew, but rather they wold spend mony to
lette it. I suppose the Abbot of Bery shuld labor for him rather than
anodir, becawse the sey Abbot is a perteynor to the lord that is the
freris mayntener, &c.; wherefor, ser, my moder and I pray yow enquere
after a man callid Clederro, whych is solisitor and attorne with Master
Will. Grey, that late was the Kingges proktor at Rome, and the seyd
Clederro sendith matiers and letters owth of Ingelond to his seyd master
ever[y] monith, &c. He is well knowe in London, and among the Lumbardes,
and with the Bischop of Winchesteris men, but I wot not wher he dwellit
in London, and I suppos if ye speke with him, he knowith me. Plese yow
to comone with him of this mater, but let him not wete of the mater
atwix my modir and him; but desir him to wryth to his master to lett
this, if it may be, or elles to se the best wey that he have not his
intent, and to comon with the proktor of the Whith Freris at Rome to hep
forth, for the freris here have laborid to my moder, and praid her to
lette his ontrewe intent, and have wrete to her proketor befor this. And
I suppose if ye speke to the prior of the freris at London, he will
writh to her seyd proktor, &c., but tell the prior no word that I know
[ther]of, but let him wete if he will wryth to his proktor, odir men
shall help forth.

More over, that ye will tell Cledero that I am not seker that the frere
laborith thus, but be talis of freris and odir; nevertheles let him
writh to his master that [for] whatsomevyr he do herin, he shall be
truly content for his labor and costes. And if ye think that Cledro will
writh effectually herin, geff hym j. noble, [bid] hym let his master
know that my Lord of Wynchester[35-1] and Danyell ow godwill to the part
that he shall labor for. And if thar be fown no sech sewth be the seyd
[fre]re, yet wold I have sum thing fro Rome to anull the old bull, &c.,
or to apeyr [_impair_] it [if] it myth be do esily, &c., and tyding
wheder ther be any sech sute, &c.

  Your own, &c.

[For] how beit that it may nowthir avayl ner hurt, yet my moder will
this be do. [I] send yow the copi of the bull, and how execucion was do,
and informacion of the mater imparte, &c. And, sir, I sha content your
noble, &c. And I pray yow red it over, and spede yow homeward, and bring
this letter home with yow, &c.

    [Footnote 34-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] As this letter refers to
    the making of a tombstone for Sir John Paston, it may be presumed
    to have been written either at the end of the year 1479, or in the
    course of the year 1480. The MS. is a rough draft, apparently in
    the hand of Edmund Paston. It has been slightly mutilated, and
    apparently since the letter was printed in Fenn’s fifth volume.]

    [Footnote 35-1: William Waynflete, Bishop of Winchester.]


968

AN INVENTORY OF PLATE[36-1]

[Sidenote: 1479]

  In primis, a sallt with j. cover,
    xx. unces di. & di. quart.

  j. stumpe of a salte,
    ij. unces & di.

  j. flat salt with a squyrell,
    j. unce iij. quarters.

  iiij. Parys cuppis with a cover, with a rose in the botom, weyeng
    lvj. unces j. quarter.

  ij. holowe disshes,
    xxix. unces iij. quarter di.

  j. chafre of silver,
    ix. unces j. quarter.

  xij. sylver spones, wereof my lady hath one.

  j. lytil spone of Rippyngales,
    j. quarter & di. quarter, j. d. ob. q^a. di.

  j. lityll spone for egges,
    j. quarter & di. quarter ob.

  j. prikettes nuper Howis,
    ix. unces ij. d. weight.

  j. preket nuper Howis,
    viij. unces iij. quarters & di.

  j. long sokett.

  j. nother long soket.

  vj. soketes, with branches to remeve.

  iij. wherwilles to the same.

  j. playne pees for potage, per estimacionem,
    xj. unces j. quarter.

  j. playn pees nuper Frere Water,
    iiij. unces j. quarter.

  j. nother playn peece nuper Frere Walter,
    iiij. unces di. quarter.

  j. chaleis,
    xv. unces & di. quarter.

  ij. cruettes,
    vij. unces iij. quarters.

  a paxbred,[36-2]
    iij. unces di. quarter j. d.

  j. holowe barbore bason, bought of Colet.

  j. standing pece couvered, bought of Elingham,
    xv. unces & j. quarter.

  iij. gilt spones.

  j. spone for grene gynger, gilt,
    j. unce j. quarter j. q^a. & di.

  j. gilte cup covered, wel shapen with trayle, with j. knop with
  a kroune enamelid,
    xxiij. unces & di. & di. quarter.

  j. nothir cupp standing covered, gilt, bell shapen with trailles,
  with a playn knopp not enamelid,
    xxiij. unces & j. quarter.

  j. maser Sipton.

  ij. masers.

  iij. gilt spones.

  j. gynger spone.

  j. bag whiteleder, wherin is all this stuff folowyng this lyne:--
    iij. girdels Staunton.
    j. girdel upholdester.
    Fawcon Skern coppe.
    Hans Eborlyn girdel.
    Purs gold with Jane Aske harnes.
    ij. lynen bagges lityll with broke silver and j. old harneis gilt.

   *   *   *

  Furst, a standing cuppe with a cover therto plommed, weyeng
    xxiiij. unces di.

  Item, a standing coppe curid gilt, weyeng
    xxxvj. unces.

  Item, a nother standing cupp cuerid gilt, weying
    xv. unces iij. q^a. & di.

  Item, a goblette of silver and gilt covered
    xiiij. unces j. quarter & di.

  Item, a nother goblett gilt, weyeng
    xij. unc’ & j. d. weight.

  Item, a nothir goblet gilt, weyeng
    vij. unc’.

  Item, a standing white pees with a cover withoute a knoppe, weyeng
    xxij. unces.

  Item, a salt with a pale covered,
    xiiij. unc’ j. quarter.

  Item, a rounde salt covered,
    xix. unc’ j. quarter di.

  Item, a rounde salt uncovered,
    viij. unces.

  Item, a basonne of
    xxxv. unc’ j. quarter.

  Item, an ewer to the same of
    xv. unc’ & di. quarter.

  Item, an ewer,
    xiiij. unc’ di. quarter.

  Item, vj. silver sponys with square sharp knoppes of
    v. unces iij. quarter j. d. wight.

  Item, spone for grene gynger of
    iij. quarters & ij. d. wight.

  Item, a grete gilt chalis with a patent longing to the same, weying
    xlij. unces j. quarter.

  Item, a litil standing pece chacid plumtes, with a kover to the same,
    x. unces j. quarter.

  Item, a blak notte standing of silver and gilt, with a kover to the
  same, weying
    xviij. unc’.

  Item, a grete maser with a prend in the botom, and the armes of
  Seint Jorge, weying
    xv. unc’ j. quarter & di.

  Item, a nother maser sownde in the botom and a sengilbonde,
    viij. unc’ & j. quarter.

  Item, a lytil maser with a foote, weying
    viij. unc’.

  Item, a nother maser with a lytill foote, weing
    viij. unc’.

  Item, a nothir litill maser with an higher foote, weying
    x. unces & j. quarter.

  Item, xx^ti spones on a bundell, weying
    xvj. unc. j. quarter.

  Item, vj. spones with acorns, weying
    v. unc’ & di. quarter.

  Item, a peyre bedes of corall with paternostris of silver and gilt,
  and a knopp of smale perle, weying
    vj. unc’ j. quarter.

  In primis, j. standing cuppe covered playne with a rounde knoppe,
  weyeng
    xxv. unces.

  j. nodir cuppe of golde covered playne with a chacid knoppe, weying
    xxiij. unces iij. quarters.

  j. layer of gold with a crokid spoute, weyeng
    xiij. unces iij. quarters.

  j. nothir layer of golde, weyeng
    xiij. unces j. quarter j. d.

  j. chaleis of fyne golde in pecis broken,
    xxiiij. unces.

  j. coppe of golde covered, chacid with a perle,
    xxj. unces.

  j. salte covered with a berall gairneshid,
    v. unces j. quarter.

  j. nothir salt covered, garnyshed with stones,
    v. unces iij. quarter.

  j. par of gilt basouns covered, weyeng
    viij^xx. xix. unces & di.

  j. salte gilte, weyeng
    xxviij. unces di. quarter.

  j. cover to the same, weyeng
    viij. unces j. quarter.

  j. nothir salte gilte withoute a cover,
    xxvij. unces iij. quarters.

  j. standing pees gilte, with a cover Skern,
    xxxvij. unces j. quarter.

  j. nothir standing pees gilte with a cover, A. P.
    xxj. unces di. & di. quarter.

  j. flatte pees covered, gilt, A. P.
    xviij. unces & di.

  j. potte for grene gynger gilte,
    x. unces & di. iiij. d. ob.

  j. cover to the same, weying
    j. unce & j. quarter.

  j. stonding cuppe covered parcell gilt, Sir Buk,
    xvj. unces & j. quarter.

  j. salt covered parcell gilt, Sir Ric.’,
    xij. unces & di.

  j. paxe parcell gilte, Staunton,
    xiij. unces.

  j. standing cuppe with a kever, parcell gilt, Staunton,
    xix. unces & di.

  j. goblett for Rynesh wyne covered,
    xj. unces & di. quarter.

  j. powder boxe,
    vj. unces j. quarter di. quarter.

  j. noder powder boxe,
    viij. unces j. quarter.

  j. candilstykke with a lous [_loose_] sokett and j. preket, P.
    xvij. unces di. quarter.

  ij. candilstikkes with ij. lous preketes, Skern,
    xxxj. unces j. quarter di.

  di. doss. [_half a dozen_] sylver spones, Shipton,
    vj. unces di. & di. quarter.

  di. doss. spones, Stanton,
    vij. unces.

  j. bason, P.
    xlv. unces di.

  j. bason, Sparke,
    lx. unces.

  j. bason, Sturmer, with a spoute,
    xxxiiij. unces. j. quarter j. d. q.

  j. bason, Sturmer, withoute a spoute,
    xxxij. unces j. quarter di. quarter j. d. q^a.

  j. bason, Rous,
    l. unces iij. quarters.

  j. ewer, P.
    xvj. unces & di. & di. quarter.

  j. ewer, Sparke,
    xx. unces.

  j. ewer, Sturmer,
    xiiij. unces j. quarter and di. quarter q^a.

  j. ewer, Sturmer,
    xiiij. unces di. di. quarter j. d. ob. q^a.

  j. ewer, Rous,
    xviij. unces.

  j. pott, Hous,
    lvij. unces.

  j. pott, P.
    xxviij. unces iij. quarter di. ij.

  j. pott, S. . . . lett,
    xv. unces.

  j. pott, Rous,
    xxxv. unces.

  j. pott, Spark,
    xxvij. unces j. quarter.

  j. flagon,
    xxxix. unces.

  j. layer,
    ix. unces a quarter & di.

  j. layer,
    ix. unces j. quarter & ij. di.

  vj. Parys cuppis with a cover, Skerne,
    lxx. unces iij. quarters di.

  j. grete boll pees, with a cover, Noris,
    xl. unces j. quarter.

  xxiij. disshis of sylver, Skerne,
    xvij^{xx.}vj. unces di.

  iiij. chargeours,
    v^{xx.}x. unces.

  xxvij. dishes,
    xx^{xx.}xj. unces di. & di. quarter.

  xxiij. sawcers,
    vj^{xx.}xv. unces.

  [39-1]xij. flatt cuppis of silver, P. and Staunton,
    v^{xx.}v. unces iij. quarters.

  [39-1]iiij. coveres to the same, P. and Staunton,
    xl. unces.

  j. chargeour priour (?) water,
    xlvj. unces j. quarter di.

    [Footnote 36-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This inventory was
    certainly drawn up after the death of Agnes Paston, but how many
    years later it is impossible to say.]

    [Footnote 36-2: A silver plate with a figure of the Crucifixion
    upon it given to be kissed at Mass.]

    [Footnote 39-1: These two entries are bracketed together in the
    MS., and ‘Shend bi Ley’ (?) written in the margin.]

  [[with a rose in the botom, weyeng
  _text has “weyeng,”_

  j. prikettes nuper Howis, / ix. unces ij. d. weight.
  _text has “weight,”_

  j. standing pece couvered, bought of Elingham,
  _text has “Elingham.”_

  j. cover to the same, weyeng,
  _text has “weyeng,”_

  j. paxe parcell gilte, Staunton,
  _period after “j.” missing_

  j. candilstykke ... and j. preket, P.
  _text has “P,”_]]


969

ABSTRACT[39-2]

WILLIAM PASTON TO HIS BROTHER EDMUND PASTON

[Sidenote: After 1479]

Encloses the will of his father, ‘such as my brother hath’; who says he
had it out of the register. My business is no further advanced since I
left you, except that my brother has got a pardon of the alienation made
by the Bishop of Winchester. Can get no estate in it except according to
his father’s will, viz. to himself and his heirs-male. My brother’s will
is that I should have Runham, which is £8 a year at least, in recompense
of the 10 marks out of Sporle, if he would release all his right in that
manor. There is nothing touching you in my brother’s[40-1] will, for I
read it over and will write it also; ‘so that I woll have the same for
my copy that he wrote with his own hand.’

Recommend me heartily to my sister your wife.

  London, 22 Feb.

  [The writer of this was William, the son of the eldest John Paston,
  not that uncle William with whom the two younger John Pastons had so
  many disputes. I see nothing to fix the date beyond the fact that
  the letter was written after Sir John Paston’s death.]

    [Footnote 39-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 40-1: Sir John Paston, who died in 1479.]


970

WILLIAM PASTON TO JOHN KYNG[40-2]

_To John Kynge, Fermour of my Maner of Hartwelbury, in Kelsall, besides
Royston, be this delyverd._

[Sidenote: 1480 / FEB. 24]

John Kyng, I grete yow hartely well; and I understond as well by my
frende, Syr William Storar, as by Ric. Browne, that as well my kynnesman
Syr John Paston that dede is, as my kynnesman John Paston that now
leveth, have ben with yow, and yovyn yow many grete thretis, for that ye
acordyng to the trowth, tolde unto them that ye ocupyed my maner of
Harwelbury be my leese, and be my ryght. And further more I understond,
notwithstondyng the seyde grete thretis, that ye, lyke a full trewe,
harty frende, have delyd and fastely abedyn in my tytill, and wolde not
retorne to none of them. Wherfor I hartely thank yow; and furthar more
to corage yow in yowr fast dealyng, I schew onto yow that I have ryght
bothe in law and in concience, wherby I promyse yow on my feythe to
defende yow and save yow harmeles for the occupacion of the londe, or
any thynge that ye schall doo in my titill a gaynst hym, and it schulde
cost me as moche as the maner is worth, and also another tyme to doo as
moche for yow, and it ly in my powre, yf ye have ony mater to doo ther
as I may doo for yow.

And, also, I here say, by my seid frende, Syr William Storar, and by
Ric. Brown, that ye ar of suche substaunce, and of suche trust, and
suche favor in the contre ther, that it lithe in yowr powre to do a
goode turne for yowr frende.

Wretyn at London, the xxiiij^ti day of Februari.

  Be WILLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 40-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is scarcely necessary
    to point out that this letter was probably written within a year
    after Sir John Paston’s death.]


971

GEORGE, SERVANT TO WILLIAM PASTON, TO JOHN KYNG[41-1]

_To John Kyng of Therfeld, in Herdfordshire._

[Sidenote: Date uncertain]

Right trusty and welbeloved frende, I comaunde me to you. And, Ser,
I tolde my maister that ye wolde have ben with him or this; for which
cause he mervaileth ye kepe nat your promyse. Wherfore I avise you to
come and bryng my maister his money afore this fest of Cristmasse.

And, also, ye ar yerly behynde of a boore or els ten shillinges after
the price of oon bore. And where ye be owyng your boore for ij. yerys,
I wolde avyse you to delyver unto Ser William Storer the seid dute, or
els I counceile you to send my maister a resonable somme of money with
thies boores afore Cristmasse for your thanke, consideryng his kynde
dealyng, as well in sufferaunce of your money as in your owne matier.

Writen at London, the xvj^th day of Decembre.

  Be your frende, GEORGE,

  servaunte to Mr. W. PASTON.[41-2]

    [Footnote 41-1: We place this letter after the last for
    convenience. Its date is unimportant.]

    [Footnote 41-2: The subscription is in a different hand from the
    letter itself, which is in a clerk’s hand, very well written.]


972

JOHN, PRIOR OF BROMHOLM, TO JOHN PASTON[41-3]

_To my right worchipful maister, John Paston, Sqwyer._

[Sidenote: 1480-7]

Right worchipful maister, I recomaunde me un to yow, desiryng to knowe
of youre welfare and prosperyte, wheche Jesu maynteyne and encreese to
His pleser after youre hertys desyre, thankyng yow ever of youre good
maistership to me shewed at alle tymes withoute deserte on my behalve,
prayng yow, and hirtely besechyng of youre goode contynuance. Please it
yowre maistership, for as moche as it [is] moved on to the my good
maisters, the counsell of the Duche of Lancastr, that they be
weelwillyng to make laboure on to my Sovereyn Lady the Qween at youre
good instaunce for certeyn tymber toward my dortour at Bromholm, in
wheche myn specyall desyre is to have viij. princypall beemys, everych
on in length xj. zerds. I am not expeert in makyng of any supplicacion,
besechyng youre maistership to take it uppon you to do it make after
your avyce, alegged all poverte, as youre worchipfull discrecion can
moche better than I can enforme; and I remitte all to youre wysdam, ever
besechyng you to calle this matyer to youre remembraunce. No more at
this tyme, but the Holy Trinite mote have yow in His governaunce, and
sende you longe lyf to endure to His pleser.

Wreten the xiiij^e day of Octobr.

  Youre preest and chapeleyn,

  JOHN, Priour of Bromholm.

    [Footnote 41-3: [From Fenn, iii. 400.] On the date of this letter
    Fenn remarks as follows:--‘John Titleshale was prior of Bromholm
    from 1460 for about twenty years. This letter must have been
    written therefore either on the 14th October 1460, or on the same
    day in 1465, as Edward IV. married in that year, and J. Paston
    died in May 1466. If it was written in the former, the request
    [for timber] must have been to Queen Margaret; if in the latter,
    to Elizabeth, the Queen of Edward IV.’ In these observations Fenn
    overlooks the possibility of the letter having been addressed to
    any other John Paston than the first of that name; and neither of
    the two years, which alone suit that supposition, has much
    internal probability. It is inconceivable that the letter could
    have been written in 1460, when Queen Margaret had retired into
    Wales after the battle of Northampton, and it is almost equally
    improbable that the date could have been 1465, when John Paston,
    the father, was in prison. We have very little doubt that the
    letter was addressed to John Paston the youngest, called of
    Gelston, long after his father’s death, and after that of his
    brother Sir John also. John Tytleshale, who was Prior of Bromholm
    in 1460, was succeeded, at what date we are not informed, by John
    Macham; and after him John Underwood, Bishop of Chalcedon,
    suffragan of the Bishop of Norwich, was prior in 1509. The date of
    this letter, however, must lie between 1480 and 1487, in which
    latter year John Paston the youngest was created a knight for his
    services at the battle of Stoke.]


973

ABSTRACT[43-1]

[Sidenote: Not after 1481]

Appointment touching ‘Ayeseldys wyff.’ Her friends to labour for her
acquittal of the felony, without letting of Wremmegey’s wife, etc. £20
to be deposited ‘in mene hand’ by the friends of A’s wife, to be
delivered on her acquittal to Darby and other frends of W.’s wife. Also
Master Yelverton shall have his £3 due to him from Ayseldys wife paid by
both parties.

_Signed_--John Yelverton.

  [I can find no other reference to the matter referred to in this
  paper, and cannot tell the date; but as John Yelverton, the son of
  the judge, died on the 9th July 1481 (Blomefield, x. 31), it cannot
  be later than that year.]

    [Footnote 43-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


974

EDMUND PASTON TO WILLIAM PASTON[43-2]

_To my brother, Wylliam Paston, be this delyverd._

[Sidenote: About 1481(?)]

I hartely recomawnd me to zow. Here is lately fallyn a wydow in
Woorstede, whyche was wyff to one Bolt, a worstede marchaunt, and worth
a m^l._li._, and gaff to hys wyff a C. marke in mony, stuffe of howsold,
and plate to the valew of an C. marke, and x_li._ be zere in land. She
is callyd a fayer jantylwoman. I wyll for zour sake se her. She is ryght
systyr, of fader and modyr, to Herry Ynglows. I purpose to speke with
hym to gett hys good wyll. Thes jantylwoman is abowght xxx. zeres, and
has but ij. chyldern, whyche shalbe at the dedes charge; she was hys
wyff but v. zere. Yf she be eny better than I wryght for, take it in
woothe I shew the leeste. Thus lete me have knowlache of zowr mynde as
shortly as ze can, and whan ze shall moun be in this cuntre. And thus
God send zow good helth and good aventure.

From Norwyche, the Saterday after xij^the day.

  Your,

  E. PASTON.

    [Footnote 43-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] There is nothing to show
    the date of this letter, except the fact that William Paston did
    not come of age before the year 1481, so that it is not likely to
    be earlier. Perhaps it may be a few years later, in which case the
    widow would not have been very much his senior; but that
    circumstance was not likely, in those days, to have been greatly
    regarded in the matter.]


975

EDMUND PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[44-1]

_To my ryght wurchypfull and especiall good mother, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: Between 1481-4]

Ryght worchypfull and moste especialle good modyr, in my moste umble
wyse, with alle my dute and servyse, I recomawnd me to yow, besechynge
zow of zour blyssyng, whyche is to me moste joy of erthely thynge; and
it plese zow to be so good and kynd modyr to me to forgeve me, and also
my wyffe, of owr leude offence that we have not don ower dute, whyche
was to have seyn and ave waytyd up on zow or now. My huswyffe trustythe
to ley to zow her huswyferey for her excuse, wyche I muste beseche zow
not to accepte, for in good faythe I deme her mynde hathe ben other weys
ocapyed than as to huswyfery, whyche semyth welle by the latchesnes of
the tylthe of her landdes. I beseche God for the forderawnce of them as
now rewarde zow and the good parson of Mautby, and also Mastyer Baley,
who I wende woold not have balkyd this pore loggeyng to Norwyche wardes.

I undyrstand by the bryngger here of that ze entende to ryde to
Walsyngham; yf it please zow that I may wete the seayson, as my dute is,
I shalle be redy to awayte up on zow.

Plese it zow that the brynggar here of cam to me for x_s._ viij_d._
whyche I shuld ow hys fadyr; trew it was at my laste departyng from hym,
I owte hym somych, but sertaynly or I cam at Thetfford homewardes,
I thowt of concyence he owte to have restoryd me as myche. I had my
horsse with hym at lyvery, and amonge alle one of them was putte to
gresse and to labur, so that he dyed of a laxe by the wey. I payed for
hard mete ever to hym.

Plese it zow to delyver Kateryn v_s._, wyche I send zow in this bylle.
I am not assartaynd how she is purveyde of mony towardes her jornay. Yf
her fadyr cowde not acleymed j_d._ of me, I woold not se her dysporveyd,
yf I myght, nor the poreste chyld that is belonggyng to hys loggeyng.

Modyr, my wyffe is boold to send zow a tokyn. I beseche zow pardon alle
thyngges not done acordyng to dute. I beseche God send zow the
accomplyshment of zour moste and woorchypfull desyers.

At Owby, the Saterday next before Candylmes.

  Zour umble son and servant,

  EDMOND PASTON.

    [Footnote 44-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Fenn dates this letter
    1479-80, suggesting that it must have been written very soon after
    Edmund Paston’s marriage with the widow of William Clippesby, as
    it seems to imply that he had not yet carried his bride to pay her
    duty to his mother. I do not, for my part, know the date of this
    marriage, and I suspect Fenn had no other clue to it than the fact
    that William Clippesby, the lady’s first husband, died on the 24th
    September 1479; but I presume his widow was still unmarried when
    she proved his will on the 18th May 1480 (_see_ Blomefield, xi.
    144). I consider, therefore, that the letter must have been
    written between the years 1481 and 1484, as Margaret Paston died
    in November of the latter year.]


976

MONASTERY OF ST. FAITH[45-1]

[Sidenote: 1481 / AUG.]

Robertus filius domini Walteri de Mauteby militis insp[ex]sit cartas
an[tiquas] . . . . concessas Deo et monasterio Sanctæ Fidis quinque
quarteria salis annualis redditus . . e olim . . . . . . quinque _wayes_
percipienda de salinis ma[r]issi de Mauteby secundum mensuram ejusdem
[mari]ssi. Quam quidem concessionem prædictus Robertus ratificat
. . . . . suum sub sigillo suo quid est[[45-2]]. And this deed sawe John
Paston at the seid Seynt Feythes, mense Augusti Anno xxj^o Regis E.
[Q]uarti. And for this rent a . . the prior and the monkys there shewyd
[to th]e seyd John, the same moneth and tyme, thes obitis foloyng
tightled in the . . . . . they s[ay]d that they . . . . . whiche wold be
knowyn and wachid. So the sayd . . . . the obbites . . . . . . . . . .
bi Maltby xij. die mensis Aprilis. Et d’ns d’nii (?)

  JOHANNES DE MALTB[Y].

    [Footnote 45-1: [Add. Charter 17,252, B.M.]]

    [Footnote 45-2: Here occurs a representation of a shield in the
    middle of the text of the MS.]


977

ABSTRACT[46-1]

ANONYMOUS TO MRS. [MARGARET PASTON?]

There is no tachment made in the land unless it be done privily. The
sheriff has been thrice in our town in these three weeks. As for the
panel of Frances’ matter, there is none of the sheriff’s deputies but
Francis to inquire of.

  [I am quite unable to attach a date to this letter, or to conjecture
  by whom it was written. Even the person to whom it is addressed is
  very uncertain, though I have suggested Margaret Paston.]

    [Footnote 46-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


978

MARGARET PASTON’S WILL.[46-2]

[Sidenote: 1482 / FEB. 4]

In the name of God, amen. I, Margaret Paston, widowe, late the wiff of
John Paston, Squier, doughter and heire to John Mauteby, Squier, hole of
spirit and mynde, with perfite avisement and good deliberacion, the
iiij^te day of February, in the yer of Our Lord God a m^{l.}cccclxxxj.
make my testament and last wille in this fourme folowyng. First,
I betake my sowle to God Almyghty and to Our Lady His blissid Moder,
Seint Michael, Seint John Baptist, and to Alle Seintes, and my body to
be beried in the ele of the cherch of Mauteby, byfore the ymage of Our
Lady there. In which ele reste the bodies of divers of myn aunceteres,
whos sowles God assoile.

Item, I bequethe to the high awter of the seid cherch of Mauteby xx_s._

Item, I wulle that the seid ele in which my body shalbe beried be newe
robed, leded, and glased, and the walles therof heyned [_heightened_]
convenyently and werkmanly.

Item, I wulle that myn executours purveye a stoon of marble to be leyde
alofte upon my grave within a yer next after my decesse; and upon that
stoon I wulle have iiij. scochens sett at the iiij. corners, wherof I
wulle that the first scochen shalbe of my husbondes armes and myn
departed, the ij^de of Mawtebysarmes and Berneys of Redham departed, the
iij^de of Mawtebysarmes and the Lord Loveyn departed, the iiij^te of
Mawtebysarmes and Sir Roger Beauchamp departed. And in myddys of the
seid stoon I wull have a scochen sett of Mawtebysarmes allone, and under
the same thise wordes wretyn, ‘In God is my trust,’ with a scripture
wretyn in the verges therof rehersyng thise wordes, ‘Here lieth Margret
Paston, late the wif of John Paston, doughter and heire of John Mawteby,
Squier,’ and so forth, in the same scripture rehersed the day of the
moneth and the yer that I shall decesse: ‘on whos sowle God have mercy.’

Item, I wulle that myn executours shall purveye xij. pore meen of my
tenauntes, or other if they suffice not, the whiche I wulle shalbe
apparailled in white gownes with hodes according, to holde xij. torches
abowte myn herse or bere at such tyme as I shalbe beried, during the
exequies and masse of my berying; which xij. torches I wille remayne in
the seid cherch of Mawteby whil they may last for my yerday.

Which yerday I wull myn heire kepe in the same cherch for me my seid
husbond and myn aunceteres yerly during the terme of xij. yeres next
after my decesse;[47-1] and I wulle that ich of the seid xij. pore meen
the day of my beriing have iiij_d._ Also, I wulle that iche preste being
at my berying and masse have viij_d._, and ich clerk in surplys iij_d._
Also, I wull that the preste which shall berie me have vj_s._ viij_d._,
so that he seye over me at the tyme of my berying all the whole service
that to the berying belongeth.

Also, I wulle that from the day and tyme that I am beried unto the ende
of vij. yeres than next folowyng be ordeyned a taper of wexe of a_li._
to brenne upon my grave ich Sonday and haliday at alle divine service to
be seid or sunge in the seid cherch and dailly at the masse of that
preest that shalle singe there in the seid ele for my sowle.

Item, I wulle that vj. tapers, ich of iiij_li._, brenne abowte myn herse
the day of my beryng, of which I wull that iiij. yerly be kept to brenne
abowte myn herse whan my yerday shalbe kept aslong as they may honestly
serve.

Item, I wulle have an honest seculer prest to synge and pray in the seid
ele for my sowle, the sowles of my father and mother, the sowle of the
seid John Paston, late my husband, and for the sowlys of his aunceteres
and myn during the terme of vij. yeres next after my decesse.

Item, I wulle that myn executours purveye a compleet legende in oon
book, and an antiphoner in an other book, which bookes I wull be yeven
to abide ther in the seid cherch to the wursship of God aslonge as they
may endure.[48-1]

Item, I wulle that every houshold in Mauteby as hastily as it may be
convenyently doo after my decesse have xij_d._

Item, to the emendyng of the cherch of Freton in Suffolk I bequethe a
chesiple and an awbe.[48-2]

And I wulle that ich houshold being my tenaunt there have vj_d._

And I bequethe to the emendement of the cherch of Basyngham a chesiple
and an awbe.[48-3]

And I wulle that every houshold there have viij_d._

Item, I bequeth to the emendyng of the cherch of Matelask a chesiple and
an awbe.[48-4]

And I wull that every pore houshold that are my tenauntes there have
viij_d._

Item, I bequethe to the emendyng of the cherch of Gresham a chesiple and
an awbe.[48-6]

And I wulle that ich pore houshold that be my tenauntes there have
vj_d._

Item, I wulle that ich pore houshold late my tenauntes at Sparham have
vj_d._

Item, to the reparacion of the cherch of Redham there as I was borne I
bequeth v. marc and a chesiple of silk with an awbe with myn armes
therupon to the emendement of the same cherche.[48-5]

Item, to iche of the iiij. houshes of Freres in Norwich, xx_s._

Item, to iche of the iiij. houshes of Freres of Yermouth and at the
South toun to pray for my sowle I bequeth xx_s._

Item, to the ankeres at the Frere Prechours in Norwich I bequeth iij_s._
iiij_d._

And to the ankeres in Conesford I bequeth iij_s._ iiij_d._

Item, to the anker at the White Freres in Norwich I bequethe iij_s._
iiij_d._

Item, to iche hole and half susters at Normans in Norwich, viij_d._

Item, to the Deen and his bretheren of the Chepell of Feld, to the use
of the same place to seye a _dirige_ and a masse for my sowle, xx_s._

Item, to the hospitalle of Seint Gile in Norwich, also for a _dirige_
and a masse for my sowle, xx_s._

Item, to iche of the iiij. pore meen, and to either of the susters of
the seid hospitall, ij_d._

Item, to the mother cherche of Norwiche for a _dirige_ and masse, xx_s._

Item, to iche lepre man and woman at the v. Yates in Norwich, iij_d._

And to iche forgoer at every of the seid yates, ij_d._

Item, to iche lepre without the North gates at Yermouth, iij_d._; and to
the forgoer ther, ij_d._

Item, to iche houshold of the parish of Seint Peter of Hungate in
Norwich that wull receyve almes, have iiij_d._

Item, I wull have a _dirige_ and a masse for my sowle at the parisshe
cherche of Seint Michael of Coslany in Norwich, and that every preste
ther havyng his stipend being therat have iiij_d._, and iche clerk in
surplys of the same parissh than ther being have ij_d._, and the parissh
clerk vj_d._, and the curat that shall seye high masse have xx_d._, and
I bequeth to the reparacion of the bellys of the same cherche vj_s._
viij_d._, and to the sexteyn there to rynge at the seid _dirige_ and
masse, xx_d._

Item, I wull that myn executours shall geve to the sustentacion of the
parson or preste that shall for the tyme mynystre the sacramentez and
divine service in the cherch of Seint Petre of Hungate in Norwich,
xx_li._ of lawfull money;[50-1] whiche xx_li._ I will it be putt in the
rule and disposicion of the cherch reves of the same cherche for the
tyme being by the oversight of the substancialle persones of the seid
parissh, to this intent, that the seid cherch reves, by the oversight as
is before-seid, shall yerly yeve, if it so be that the profites of the
seid cherch suffice not to fynde a prest after ther discrecions, part of
the seid xx_li._ to the seid parson or preste, unto the seid xx_li._ be
expended.

Item, I bequeth to Edmund Paston, my sone, a standing pece white
covered, with a white garleek heed upon the knoppe, and a gilt pece
covered with an unicorne, a fetherbedde and a traumsom at Norwich, and
the costers[50-2] of worsted that he hath of me.

Item, I bequeth to Katerine his wiff a purpill girdill harneisid with
silver and gilt and my bygge bras chafour, a brasen morter with an iren
pestell, and a stoon morter of cragge.

Item, I yeve and graunte to Robert, sone of the seid Edmund, alle my
swannes morken with the merke called Dawbeneys merk, and with the merk
late Robert Cutler, clerk, to have hold and enjoye the seid swannes with
the seid merkes to the seid Robert and his heirs for evermore.

Item, I bequeth to Anne, my doughter, wiff of William Yelverton, my
grene hangyng in my parlour at Mauteby, a standing cuppe with a cover
gilt with a flatte knoppe and a flatte pece with a cover gilt withoute,
xij. silver spones, a powder boxe with a foot and a knoppe enamelled
blewe, my best corse girdill blewe herneised with silver and gilt, my
primer, my bedes of silver enamelled.

Item, I bequeth to the seid Anne, my fetherbedde with sillour,[50-3]
curteyns and tester[50-4] in my parlour at Mauteby, with a white
covering, a peire blankettes, ij. peire of my fynest shetes iche of iij.
webbes, a fyne hedshete of ij. webbes, my best garnyssh of pewter
vessell, ij. basyns with ij. ewres, iij. candelstekes of oon sorte, ij.
bras pottes, ij. bras pannes, a bras chafour to sett by the fyre, and a
chafour for colys.

Item, I require myn executours to paie to the seid William Yelverton and
Anne the money that I shall owe them of ther mariage money the day of my
decesse of such money as shalbe receyved of such londes as I have putte
in feffement to accomplissh my wille.

Item, I bequeth to William Paston, my sone my standing cuppe chased
parcell gilt with a cover with myn armes in the botom and a flatte pece
with a traill upon the cover, xij. silver spones, ij. silver saltes
wherof oon is covered the hole bedde of borde alisaundre as it hangeth
on the gret chaumber at Mauteby, with the fetherbedde, bolster,
blankettes, and coveryng to the same, ij. peire shetes, ij. pilwes, and
my best palet, a basyn, an ewre, and a litel white bedde that hangeth
over the gresyngges in the litell chaumber at Mauteby for a trussyng
bedde.

Item, I bequeth an C. marc in money to be paied and bestowed to the use
and byhoff of the seid William Paston after this forme folowyng; that is
to sey, in purchasyng of as moche lond to him and to his heires as may
be had with the same money, or ellys to bye a warde to be maried to him
if eny suche may be goten, or ellys to be paied to him assone as it may
be convenyently gadered and receyved of sucche londes as by me are put
in feffement as is beforseid after the ele in Mauteby cherche be
fynsshed and performed as is beforseid, and after the stipend of the
preste lymyted to singe for me be yerly levied, as well as the money be
dispended upon the keping of my yerly obite. And if the seid William dye
or he come to the age of xxj. yer, than the seid C. marc to be disposed
for the wele of my sowle by myn executours.

Item, I bequeth to John Paston my sone a gilt cuppe standyng with a
cover and a knoppe liche a garkeek heed, vj. gobelettes of silver with
oon cover.

Item, I bequeth to Margery Paston, the wif of the seid John, my pixt of
silver with ij. silver cruettes and my massebook with all myn
awterclothes.

Item,[52-1] I bequeth to William Paston, sone of the seid John Paston,
and Elizabeth his suster, C. marc whan they come to laufull age, to be
take and receyved of the londes beforseid; and if either of them die or
they come to the seid age, than I wull that the part of him or hir so
deying remayne to the survyver of them at laufull age, and if they bothe
dye or they come to the seid age, than I wull that the seid C. marc be
disposed for the helth of my sowle by th’avise of myn executours.

Item, I bequeth to Custaunce, bastard doughter of John Paston, Knyght,
whan she is xx. yer of age, x. marc, and if she die bifore the seid age,
than I wull that the seid x. marc be disposed by myn executours.

Item, I bequeth to John Calle, sone of Margery my doughter, xx_li._ whan
he cometh to the age of xxiiij. yer, and if the seid John dye or he
cometh to the seid age, than I wull that the seid xx_li._ evenly be
divided attwen William and Richard, sones of the seid Margery, whan they
come to the age of xxiiij. yer; and if either of the seid William and
Richard dye or he come to the seid age, than I wull that the part of him
so dying remayne to the survyver; and if bothe the seid William and
Richard dye or the come to the seid age, than I wull that the seid
xx_li._ be disposed by the good advys of myne executours for me and my
frendes.

Item, I bequethe to Marie Tendalle, my goddoughter, my peir bedys of
calcidenys gaudied[52-2] with silver and gilt.

Item, I wull that iche of myn other godchilder be rewarded by th’avyse
of John Paston, my sone.

Item, I bequeth to Agnes Swan my servaunt, my musterdevelys gown furred
with blak, and a girdell of blak harneised with silver gilt and
enamelled, and xx_s._ in money.

Item, to Simon Gerard my silver gobelet cured and a flatt pece with
verges gilt, and myn hole litel white bedde in my chapell chaumber at
Mauteby with the fetherbedde liche as it is nowe in the seid chapell,
with a peire blankettes, a peire shetes, and a pilwe of doune.

Item, to John Heyth a materas with a traunsom, a peire shetes, a peire
blankettes, and a coverlight.

Item, I wull that myn housholt be kept after my decesse by half a yer,
and that my servauntes wages be truly paied at ther departing, and also
that every persone being my servaunt the day of my decesse have a
quarter wages beside that they at her departing have do service fore.

Item, I wull that alle suche maners, londes, and tenementes, rentes and
services whiche are descended unto me by weye of inheritaunce immediatly
after my decesse remayne unto myn heires accordyng to the last wille of
Robert Mauteby, Squier, my grauntfader, except suche londes as I have
putte in feffement to accomplissh therof my last wille, and except v.
marc of annuyte which I have graunted out of the maner of Freton in
Suffolk to Edmund Paston, my sone, Katherine his wiff, and Robert, ther
sone, for terme of ther lyves.

Item, I bequeth to Anne, my doughter, x_li._ to hir propre use.

And to Osbern Berney x. marc of the money comyng of the londes by me put
in feffement as is beforseid.

Item, I wull that the residewe of the stuffe of myn houshold unbiquothen
be divided equally betwen Edmund and William, my sones, and Anne, my
doughter.

The residewe of all my godes and catalle and dettes to me owing I yeve
and comitte to the good disposicion of myn executours to performe this
my testament and last wille, and in other dedes of mercye for my sowle,
myn aunceterez sowlez, and alle Cristen sowles, to the most pleaser of
God and profit to my sowle.

Of this my testament, I make and ordeyne the seid John Paston, Squier,
my sone, Thomas Drentall, clerk, Simon Gerard and Walter Lymyngton myn
executours.

And I bequeth to the seid John Paston for his labour x_li._

And to iche of myn other executours for their labour v. marc.

In witnesse wherof to this my present testament I have putto my seal.
Yevyn day and yer biforseid.

    [Footnote 46-2: [Add. Charter, 17,253, B.M.]]

    [Footnote 47-1: In the margin is written in John Paston’s hand,
    ‘Memorandum, v. yer to come to kepe the yerday.’]

    [Footnote 48-1: In margin, ‘v_li._ vj_s._ viij_d._’ This and the
    marginal notes which follow are all in John Paston’s hand.]

    [Footnote 48-2: In margin, ‘xvj_s._ viij_d._’]

    [Footnote 48-3: _Ibid._]

    [Footnote 48-4: _Ibid._]

    [Footnote 48-5: _Ibid._]

    [Footnote 48-6: In margin, ‘v_li._’]

    [Footnote 50-1: In margin, ‘xx_li._’]

    [Footnote 50-2: Pieces of tapestry used on the sides of tables,
    beds, etc.--_Halliwell._]

    [Footnote 50-3: Canopy of tapestry.]

    [Footnote 50-4: Head of the bedstead.]

    [Footnote 52-1: Opposite this paragraph is written in the margin
    in John Paston’s hand: ‘C. marke. Solut’ E. P. _l._ marke.’]

    [Footnote 52-2: Halliwell explains ‘gaudees’ as ‘the larger beads
    in a roll for prayer.’ According to Palsgrave they represented the
    _Paternoster_.]

  [[wherof oon is covered the hole bedde
  _punctuation unchanged: missing comma after “covered”?_

  [48-5] [48-6]
  _in the body text, footnote markers 5 and 6 are reversed, but see
  text and footnotes_]]


979

JOHN PASTON TO MARGARET PASTON[54-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull modyr, Margaret Paston._

[Sidenote: 1482(?)]

Ryght worchepfull modyr, in my most humble wyse I recomand me to yow,
besechyng yow of your dayly blyssyng. And when I may, I wyll with as
good wyll be redy to recompence yow for the cost that my huswyff and I
have put yow to, as I am now bond to thank yow for it, whyche I do in
the best wyse I can. And, modyr, it pleasyd yow to have serteyn woordys
to my wyff at hyr depertyng, towchyng your remembrance of the shortness
that ye thynk your dayes of, and also of the mynd that ye have towardes
my brethryn and systyr your chyldyr, and also of your servauntes, wher
in ye wyllyd hyr to be a meane to me, that I wold tendyr and favore the
same. Modyr, savyng your plesure, ther nedyth non enbasatours nor meanys
betwyx yow and me; for ther is neyther wyff nor other frend shall make
me to do that that your comandment shall make me to do, if I may have
knowlage of it; and if I have no knowlage, in good feyth I am
excuseabyll bothe to God and yow. And, well remembred, I wot well ye
ought not to have me in jelusye for one thyng nor other that ye wold
have me to accomplyshe, if I overleve yow; for I wot well non oo man a
lyve hathe callyd so oft upon yow as I, to make your wylle and put iche
thyng in serteynte, that ye wold have done for your sylff, and to your
chyldre and servauntes. Also at the makyng of your wylle, and at every
comunycacyon that I have ben at with yow towchyng the same, I nevyr
contraryed thyng that ye wold have doon and performyd, but alweyso ffyrd
my sylff to be bownde to the same. But, modyr, I am ryght glad that my
wyff is eny thyng your favore or trust; but I am ryght sory that my
wyff, or eny other chyld or servaunt of your shold be in bettyr favore
or trist with yow then my sylff; for I wyll and must forbere and put fro
me that, that all your other chyldre, servauntes, prestys, werkmen, and
frendys of your that ye wyll ought bequethe to, shall take to theym. And
thys have I, and evyr wylbe redy on to, whyll I leve, on my feyth, and
nevyr thought other, so God be my helpe, Whom I beseche to preserve yow
and send yow so good lyff and longe, that ye may do for youre sylff and
me aftyr my dyssease; and I beshrewe ther hertys that wold other or
shall cause yow to mystrust, or to be unkynd to me or my frendys.

At Norwyche, thys Monday, with the hand of your sone and trwest
servaunt,

  JOHN PASTON.

    [Footnote 54-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter, which was
    undoubtedly written during the later years of Margaret Paston, may
    be conveniently placed after her will.]

  [[but alweyso ffyrd my sylff
  _text unchanged: error for “alweys offyrd”?_]]


980

T. CRYNE TO JOHN PASTON[55-1]

_To my wurshepfull and tendrest maister, John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1482 / APRIL 10]

Righ wurshepfulle, one of my most kyndest and tenderest, and undeserved
most contynuell maister, I recomaunde me to you. And where your trusty
maistershep willeth me to come to Norwich, pleas it you I may not; for
ever, as in long tyme passed, on Thursday in Esterne Weke, begynne
Maister Heydons courtes and letes, the vieu of the halfyere of the
houshold accompte, the closyng up fynally of th’accomptes of alle
baillievs, so that the resceyvour may make his fynall accompte, which
wille extende in alle to xiiij. dayes and more; and to this season is my
duete, and elles I shulde not faill your pleasure.

Moreover, pleas it you, my Lord Riviers in his owne persone hath bene
atte Hikelyng, and his counseill lerned, and serched his fees for his
homages, among which ye be for Begvyles pasture in Somerton, and,
I suppose, Wynterton, late Sir John Fastolfes; my maistres your modre
for Mawtebyes in Waxham; wherein I beseche you previde, for I have done
therein hertofore, asfer as I myght, &c. What it meneth, my lord is
sette sore to approwement and husbondry. His counseill hath tolde him he
may sette his fynes for respite of homage at his pleasure, &c.

I besech you my maistresse may have worde of this. And oure blessed Lord
ever mutte preserve you, and be your governour and defender.

Wreten at Thorplond, this Wednesday in Esterne Weke, fallyng the x. day
of Aprill, anno E. iiij^ti xxij.

  Your servaunt,

  T. CRYNE.

    [Footnote 55-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


981

ABSTRACT[56-1]

[Sidenote: 1482 / OCT. 9]

Grant by Margaret Paston to her son Edmund and his wife Catherine and to
Robert their son, of an annuity of five marks out of the manor of
Freton, Suffolk, with power to distrain for payment.

9 Oct. 22 Edw. IV.

    [Footnote 56-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


982

MARGERY PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[56-2]

_To my right worshipfull master, John Paston, in haste._

[Sidenote: 1482(?) / NOV. 1]

Right reverent and worshipfull sir, in my moste umble vice, I recomaunde
me unto yow, as lowly as I can, &c. Plese you to wete, John Howes,
Alexander Qwharteyn, John Fille, with the parson and the newe myller of
Marlyngforthe, have goten Thom’ At Welles carte of Estetodenham, fermour
to myn uncle William Paston, Herry Hervy of Meelton Magna, fermour and
baly to my seide uncle, Ric. Barkers carte of the seide towne of
Meelton, late fermour, and yette is in daunger to[57-1] my seide uncle,
and William Smythes carte of Brandon juxta Bernham Broom, late fermour
and baly, and also in daunger to[57-1] my seide uncle, on Monday and
Twesday last past, caryed a wey from Merlyngforth in to the place at
Seint Edmondes in Norwich, xij. of yowr greete plankes, of the weche
they made vj. loodes, beryng a bowte the seide cartes, bowes and gleves,
for feere of takyng a wey. Sir, as for yowr servauntes of Marlyngforth,
they withholde her catell and hem selfe bothe from the coorte, and come
not within the lordship, nor make noon attornment, exept Thom’ Davy and
John Water, weche absentyng of the tenauntes is to them a greet hurt and
los, for lak of sedyng ther londes with ther wynter corn; besechyng you
for Godes sake to remembre som remedy for them.

My Lady Caltorp hath ben at Geppeswich on pilgry mache, and came homward
be my Lady of Norffolk, and ther was moche communicacion of yowr mater
be twix you and myn uncle, seyng to my Lady Caltorp, ye nede not a gonne
to London, ye myght have an ende at home; rememberyng to my seid Lady
Caltorp of the mocion that he made towchyng the maner of Sporle,
promyttyng to my lady to abyde that, and to write and seale as largely
as any man wol desire hym. And at his departyng from my lady he was not
mery, what the cauce was I wot not [but he was not mery of your
departyng].[57-2] My Lady Calthorp desireth me to write to yow to have
ende, for he intendes largely to have a peace with yow, as he seth; but
truste hym not to moche, for he is not goode.

My mother in lawe thynketh longe she here no word from you. She is in
goode heele, blissed be God, and al yowr babees also. I mervel I here no
word from you, weche greveth me ful evele; I sent you a letter be
Brasiour sone of Norwiche, wher of I here no word. No more to you at
this tyme, but Almyghty Jesu have you in Hes blissed kepyng.

Wreten at Norwich, on Allowmes Day at nyght.

  Be yowr servaunt and bedewoman,

  MARGERY PASTON.

Sir, I prey yow, if ye tary longe at London, that it wil plese to sende
for me, for I thynke longe sen I lay in yowr armes.

    [Footnote 56-2: _Ibid._ This letter, it will be seen, must have
    been written before the death of Margaret Paston in 1484, and from
    what is stated in No. 953, it is certainly not earlier than 1479.
    The date, moreover, must be between 1480 and 1482, for it is
    stated that the outrages here complained of occurred on the Monday
    and Tuesday before the letter was written; and in the next letter
    we find that there was a new outrage of the same description on
    Friday. If Hallowmas Day, the date of this letter, was a
    Wednesday, the year must be 1480, if a Thursday 1481, and if
    Friday 1482. We are rather inclined to think it was the latter.]

    [Footnote 57-1: ‘In danger to’ signifies either in debt or
    otherwise responsible to another person.]

    [Footnote 57-2: These words are crossed out in the MS.]


983

MARGERY PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[58-1]

_To my ryght wurchupfull mayster, John Paston, Esquyer, be this letter
delyverd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1482 / NOV. [3]]

Myne owyn swete hert, in my most humylwyse, I recomaund me on to you,
desyryng hertly to here of your welfar, the wheche I beseche Alle myghty
God preserve and kepe to His plesur, and your hertes desyer.

Ser, the cause of my wrytyng to you at this tyme: on Friday att nyght
last past come Alexander Wharton, John Hous, and John Fille, with ij.
good carts well mannyd and horsyd with hem to Marlyngford, and there at
the maner of Malyngford and at the mille lodyn bothe cartes with
mestlyon[58-2] and whete, and betymys on Saturday, in the mornyng, they
departyd fro Marlyngford towardes Bongey, as it is seyd; for the seyd
cartes come fro Bongey, as I soppose, by the sendynge of Bryon, for he
goth hastyly over the se, as it is seyd. And as I suppose he wyll have
the mestlyon over with hym, for the most part of the cart loodes was
mestlyon, &c.

Item, ser, on Saturday last past, I spacke with my cosyn Gornay, and he
seyd, if I wold goo to my Lady of Norffolk, and beseche hyr good grace
to be your good and gracyous lady, she wold so be, for he seyd that one
word of a woman should do more than the wordes of xx. men, yiffe I coude
rewyll my tonge, and speke non harme of myn unkyll. And if ye comaund me
so for to do, I trist I shuld sey nothynge to my ladys displesure, but
to your profyt; for me thynkyth bi the wordes of them and of your good
fermore of Oxned, that thei wyll sone drawe to an ende. For he cursyth
the tyme that ever he come in the ferme of Oxned, for he seyth that he
wotyth well that he shall have a grette losse, and yet he wyll not be a
knowyn wheder he hathe payd or nought; but whan he sethe his tyme, he
wyll sey trowth.

I understond by my seyd cosyn Gornay that my lady is nere wery of hyr
parte, and he seyth my lady shal come on pylgremage in to this towne,
but he knowth not wheder afore Cristmes or aftyr; and if I wold thanne
gete my Lady Calthorpe, my moder in lawe, and my moder, and myselfe, and
come before my lady, besechyng hyr to be your good and gracyous lady, he
thynkyth ye shull have an ende; for fayne she wold be redde of it with
hyr onowr savyd, but yette money she wold have.

No more to you at this tyme, butte I mervell sore that I have no letter
from you, but I prey God preserve you, and send me good tydynges from
you, and spede you well in your materes. And as for me, I have gotyn me
anothyr logyn felawe, the ferst letter of hyr name is Mastras Byschoppe.
She recomaundyth hyr to you by the same tokyn that ye wold have had a
tokyn to my Mayster Bryon.

Att Norwych, the Sonday next after the Fest of All Seyntes.

  Be yowr servaunt and bedewoman,

  MARGERY PASTON.

    [Footnote 58-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] For evidence of date, see
    preliminary note to last letter.]

    [Footnote 58-2: Mixed corn, commonly rye and wheat, which were
    most in demand to make bread of.]


984

B. R. TO JOHN PASTON[60-1]

_To the right worshipfull John Paston, squier, with my lord
Chamburlayn._

[Sidenote: 1479-83]

Right worshipfull sir, y recommaunde me to you, as hartily as y can,
desiring to undrestand zour welefare, and also to knowe somwhat
certainly hou your matier dothe with your uncle, and hou fer ye be, for
in thes parties y assertayne you, moche mater is shewed and proclaimed
in worshipful presence, fer fro th’entent of your welewillers, of the
discorage and reprofe in maner of you, and by such as men supposed you
to have ben right wele favoured with, and the contrary shewed in the
presence of right worshipfull, and right many, and as it is said, iij.
scor in nombre, with such termes and under such forme, as it is
reported, as is full hevy to diverse here for to here. Hou it is ye
knowe beste, and hou it is I pray you lete your frendis in this cuntre
undirstand; for right a worshipfull persone told me of this, to the
which y coude not answer, I se al day the world so unsure. But, Sir, ye
did of policy some thingis that peradventure, and it were to do, ye wold
take anothir avise, &c. I can nomore but _sapienti pauca_, &c. And I
biseche you, Sir, send me some tidingis of the parties beyonde the se,
for owr wyves here speke of many thingis, &c. Moreovir, Sir, Margarete
Ronhale told me late that my maistres your wif fareth wele, blissed be
Almighti God, and all your other frendis here, blissed be God. Sir, it
is so that, as y am enformed, there is a soudiour of Caleis called John
Jacob, of olde tyme duelling in Lynne.[60-2] I pray you to inquir
secretly what maner man he ys, and in what condicion there, for I know a
man hath to do with him; but be ye beknowen of no thinge, but that ye
list wisely to enquere what he is and of what condicion, &c. And if
there be any thing in thies parties that y can do you service yn, I pray
you commaunde you, and I shalbe as redy to the accomplisshment therof to
my power, as any man lyvyng; and that knowith God, Who I biseche to send
me good tidingis fro you, and you your noble desires. From Weston.

  By yours,

  B. R.

    [Footnote 60-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 220.] This letter is probably
    late in the reign of Edward IV. John Paston would seem to have
    entered the service of Hastings, the Lord Chamberlain, some time
    after the death of his brother Sir John in 1479. _See_ No. 993.]

    [Footnote 60-2: Against this passage in the margin is written in
    another hand:--‘M^{d}. pro Barnard.’]


985

WILLIAM PASTON AND SIR JOHN FASTOLF[61-1]

To alle maner of pepill to whome this present wrytyng shall come unto,
se, or here, we, William Barker, late of Blofeld, in the cownte of
Norffolk, clark, and Margret Wyssetour, wedow, late the wyf of William
Wyssetyr, late of Pokethorp, be Norwich, gentylman, dyssesid, send
gretyng in our Lord God Everlastyng.

For as meche as it is merytory to wytnesse and testyfy the treuth in
materes dowtabill or beyng in varyaunce, whan ony persons is lefully
ther to requyred, It is so that I, the seid William Barker, was late
howshold servaunte be the space of xxj. yere with Sir John Fastolf,
Knyght, dyssesid, and had wedded Annes, late dyssesid, that was the
hoole syster, bothe on to Sir Thomas Howes, clerk, dyssesid, and also
hoole syster to Isabell, modyr to the seid Margret Wyssetyr, which
forseid Thomas Howys and William Wyssetyr were bothe howshold servauntes
many yerys to the seid Sir John Fastolf, and were with hym in such
syngler trust that he made them bothe his feoffes in alle his landes
with in the reame of Ynglond, and also his exsecutores: Be it knowen to
alle maner persons that we, the seid William Barker and Margret
Wyssetyr, testyfy, depose, and wytnesse for trouthe that we have full
serteyn prof and knowlache that William Paston, of the seid counte of
Norffolk, jentylman, was kynnysman unto the seid Sir John Fastolf, and
was with hym in ryght syngler gode favour and trust; wherupon the seid
Sir John Fastolf made the seid William Paston one of his seid feoffes in
all his seyd maneres, londes, and tenementes, rentes, and servyces with
in this seid reame of Ynglond, and made this seid William prevy to many
of his materys of gret charge, and putt the seid William Paston to many
lawbores in his lyf, which the seid William Paston ded of gode love and
kynd dysposycion, for he never had of the seid Sir John Fastolf fee ne
reward in hys lyf; notwithstondyng he had for the seid Syr John Fastolf
and for his materes many grete lawboures, costes, jornays, and besynesse
in the lyf of the seid Sir John Fastolf, and ded for hym many kynd dedes
at his owne charge, for the which the seid Sir John, and he had
contenuyd lyff, wold have largely have recompensed. And also the seid
William Paston had, aftir the desesse of the seid Sir John Fastolf, at
the desyr and instans of the exsecutores of the seid Syr John, had many
gret lawboures, costes, and jurnays to his gret peyne, as well in rydyng
to London many and sundry tymes, contenuyng many yeres to help suche
materes as were devysyd ayens the seid exsecutors, and also to answer to
suche accions and sutys and byll putt into the Kynges Chauncery,
wherupon wryttes of _subpena_ dyvers and many tymes made upon gret
peynys were delyvered to the seid William to appere in the Kynges
Chauncery, which were taken be gret astates and be suche myghty persons
as wold have recoveryd the lond wrongfully, and thus trobelyd the seid
William Paston, be cause he was a feffee, and taryd hym there and his
councell to his gret inportunabill charges. Wherupon we, the seid
William Barker and Margret Wyssetyr depose, wytnesse, and be this
present sertyfye for trouthe that we war present whan the seid Sir
Thomas Howys and William Wyssetyr, in parcell of recompens of suche
forseid lawbours and costes as the seid William Paston had had, as wele
in the lyfe of the seid Sir John as after his dyssese, graunted and yaf
to the seid William Paston a peyer of basons coveryd of sylver of Parysh
towche and over gylt, powncyd and imbossyd with rooses, and with grete
large amellys [_enamels_] in the botome of bothe basons, with serteyn
bestys inbossyd stondyng with inn an hegge of sylver and gylt upon the
seid amellys, which bothe basons ded way of Troy weyt ix^xx. unces, and
also a gredeyren of sylver of Parysse towche, not gylt, weying of Troy
weyth ----[63-1] unces, and also a gret chargeour of sylver of Parysse
towche, not gylt, weying of Troy weyth ----[63-1] unces, to have and to
hold to the seid William, his eyres, excecutores, and assignes, as his
own godes for ever. And also we wytnesse that we ware also present whan,
for a serteyn som of mony to be payd be the seid William Paston, whereof
a parte be comenawnt was payd be the seid William Paston to the seid Sir
Thomas Howys, and a parte to on Edmond Holkham, and the remenaunt was
payd to one Margret Holkham, syster to the seid Edmond; and so the seid
William Paston had clerly payed all the seid mony. The seid Thomas Howse
and William Wyssetyr bargayned, sold, and graunted to the seid William
Paston, his eyres, exsecutores, and assignes, in fee sympille for ever,
a tenement called Methis, otherwyse called Holkham, with alle the londes
and tenementes, rentes and servyces, free or bond, and with all the
apportenaunces ther to belongyng, in the town of Cayster ond oder
townnys adjoynyng with inne the seid cownte of Norffolk, and delyvered
to the seid [William] Paston and to his assignes a state of all the seid
tenementes, londes, rentes, and servyces, with all the seid
aportenaunces . . . . . . . sold and bargayned to the seid William
Paston alle suche londes, rente, and servyces as the seid Sir John
Fastolf . . . . . . . . or be the ryght of ony manere that he or ony man
to his use had in possession, or that the seid Thoma[s] . . . . . . .
ony other be the reson that they were feffes of trust of the seid John
Fastolf had or claymed to have . . . . . . . or claymed to have to be
yssant or chargeabill oute or upon the seid tenement called Methe[s]
. . . . . . . . . . londes, tenementes, rentes, servyces at ony tyme
afore or than longyng to the seid tenement or owt . . . . . . . a manere
called Hornynghall, with the apportenaunces, late Clerys, in the seid
town of Castyr, to have [and to hold to the said William] Paston, his
eyres and assygnes, the seid lond, rent, and servyce for ever mor. And
utterly be ther dede and . . . . . . . . . . . . . and dyscharged the seid William Paston, his eyres and his assygnes for yeldyng of payment
of ony . . . . . . . . . . servyce; and also dyscharged all the seid
tenement and the seid manere, and alle oder the premysses, with
alle the . . . . . . . . . . as now have or shalle here aftir be
possessoneres of the seid tenement or manere with the aportenaunces
. . . . . . . . . . more. Alle whiche mater afore rehersid, and every
parte therof, we, the seid William Barker and Margre[t Wyssetyr . . .
. . . . ] trew, and we, and iche one of us, will at alle tyme be redy
to wytnesse and depose the same be ony suche . . . . . . . . . persones
outh to do or may do afore ony Juge Spyrytualle or Temperall as we will
answer a fore God [at the dreadful] day of Dome. In wytnesse wherof we,
the seid William Barker and Margret Wyssetyr, to this present have sett
to our [sealles].

Wretyn the ----[64-1] day of the ----[64-1] yer of the reyn of
Kyng.[64-2]

  (L. S.)

  (L. S.)

    [Footnote 61-1: [Add. Charter 17,256, B.M.] This declaration was
    drawn up after the death of William Worcester, and perhaps after
    that of William Paston also. The exact date of Worcester’s death
    is uncertain. We only know that he was alive as late as 1480, when
    he visited Oxford on his travels and measured some of the churches
    there (_see_ his _Itinerarium_, 296), and that he was dead in
    Richard III.’s time. The document, however, may be conveniently
    placed at the end of the reign of Edward IV. The original MS. is a
    sheet of paper mutilated on the right-hand side towards the end.
    The seals of William Barker and Margaret Worcester are attached by
    tails of parchment to a parchment binding at the bottom. On the
    back is written in a more modern hand:--‘A Testymonyall that
    William Paston, Gent., was kinsman to Sir Jo. Fastolf, and other
    matters within concernyng the landes somtyme Holhams in Caster,
    afterwardes the sayd William Paston.’]

    [Footnote 63-1: Blank in original.]

    [Footnote 64-1: Blanks in MS.]

    [Footnote 64-2: So in MS.]


986

ABSTRACT[65-1]

W. BARKER TO [MARGARET PASTON?]

Begs her ‘maystrasshipp’ to inform his rightworshipful master of the
conduct of Master Keche at Wetyng, who on Monday means to be there with
a great fellowship.

  [This letter is unimportant, but as being written by William Barker
  it may conveniently be placed after the last No., although probably
  addressed to Margaret Paston, and if so, most likely during the life
  of her husband. It appears by inquisition _post-mortem_, 1 Edw. IV.,
  No. 46, that Elizabeth, Countess of Oxford, held the manor of Weting
  in Feltwell of the Duke of Norfolk.]

    [Footnote 65-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


987

JOHN PASTON’S BOOKS[65-2]

_The Inventory off Englysshe Boks off John . . . . . made the v. daye of
Novembre, anno regni Regis E. iiij. . . . ._

1. A boke had off myn ostesse at the George . . . . off _the Dethe off
Arthr begynyng at Cassab[elaun, Guy Earl of] Warwyk, Kyng Ri. Cur de
Lyon, a Cronic[le] . . . . . to Edwarde the iij._, prec. . . .

2. Item, a Boke of Troylus whyche William Bra . . . . . hath hadde neer
x. yer, and lent it to Dame . . . . Wyngfelde, and _ibi ego vidi_; valet
. . . . .

3. Item, a blak Boke with _the Legende off Lad[ies_, _la Belle Dame]
saunce Mercye_, _the Parlement off Byrd[es_, _the Temple of] Glasse_,
_Palatyse and Scitacus_, _the Me[ditations of . . . . ] the Greene
Knyght_; valet,--

4. Item, a Boke in preente off the Pleye off the [Chess].

5. Item, a Boke lent Midelton, and therin is _Bele Da[me sans] Mercy_,
_the Parlement of Byrds_, _Balade . . . . . . off Guy and Colbronde_,
_off the Goos th . . . . . _, _the Dysputson bytwyen Hope and Dyspeyr_,
. . . . . . _Marchaunts_, _the Lyffe of Seynt Cry[stofer]_.

6. A reede Boke that Percyvall Robsart gaff m[e] . . . . . . . . _off
the medis off the Masse_, _the Lamentacion . . . . . . . . off Chylde
Ypotis_, _a Preyer to the Vernyclr_ . . . . . . . . callyd _the Abbeye
off the Holy Goost_, . . . . . . . .

7. Item, in quayers:--Tully _de Senectute_ in . . . . . . . . . .
wheroff ther is no mor cleer wretyn . . . . . . .

8. Item, in quayers:--Tully, or Cypio,[66-1] _de Ami[citia]_[66-2]
leffte with William Worcester; valet . . . . . .

9. Item, in qwayers, a Boke of the Polecye of In . . . . .

10. Item, in qwayers, a Boke _de Sapiencia_ . . . . . . wherin the ij.
parson is liknyd to Sapi[ence] . . . . .

11. Item, a Boke de Othea,[66-3] text and glose, valet . . . . . . in
quayers.

   *   *   *

Memorandum,[66-4] myn olde Boke off Blasonyngs off a[rms].

Item, the nywe Boke portrayed and blasoned.

Item, a copy off Blasonyngs off armys and th . . . names to be fownde by
letter.

Item, a Boke with armys portrayed in paper . . . . .

Memorandum, my Boke of Knyghthod and the man[er] off makyng off Knyghts,
off Justs, off Tor[neaments] ffyghtyng in lystys, paces holden by
so[ldiers] . . . . . and chalenges, statuts off weer, and de _Regim[ine
Principum]_, valet . . . . . . . . .

Item, a Boke off nyw Statuts ffrom Edward the iiij.

    [Footnote 65-2: [From Fenn, ii. 300.] This is a catalogue of the
    books either of John Paston the younger or of John Paston, Knight,
    most probably the former, drawn up in the reign of Edward IV., but
    owing to the decay of the original MS. we cannot tell in what
    year. It certainly could not have been earlier than 1475, when
    _The Game and Play of the Chess_ was first printed by Caxton. It
    is in itself a remarkable thing that the expression ‘in print’
    should have got into use even during the reign of Edward IV.; but
    one may suppose that such an expression could hardly have been
    current for at least a year or two after the first printed book
    appeared. We therefore, without deciding the year, place the paper
    at the end of King Edward’s reign.]

    [Footnote 66-1: _Quære_, if Cypio is not a mistake from ‘Somnium
    Scipionis,’ a piece which is usually printed with the ‘de
    Amicitia,’ and probably accompanied it in this manuscript.--F.]

    [Footnote 66-2: It is a curious circumstance that this book should
    be here mentioned as left with William Worcester, who with the
    assistance of John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, and John Phrea or
    Free, a monk of Bristol, translated it.--F.]

    [Footnote 66-3: _See_ vol. v. p. 3, Note 1.]

    [Footnote 66-4: These further memoranda seem to have been added at
    a later period, probably in the reign of Henry VII., as the last
    entry is of ‘a book of new statutes from Edward IV.’]

  [Transcriber’s Note:
  In the lists of book titles, all commas are editorial (Gairdner)
  but the titles are separately underlined in the MS.]

  [[3. _... the Greene / Knyght_; valet,--
  _“valet” printed in italic type: corrected to match MS_

  5. _... saunce Mercye_, _the Parlement off ..._
  _comma missing_

  _... Marchaunts_, _the Lyffe of Seynt Cry[stofer]_
  _text has “Marehaunts”: corrected from Fenn and MS_]]


988

VERSES BY A LADY[67-1]

_Verses written by a Lady in the reign of Henry VI. or Edward IV. to an
absent Lord with whom she was in love._


  My ryght good lord, most knyghtly gentyll knyght,
  On to your grace in my most humbyll wyse,
  I me comand, as it is dew and ryght,
  Besechyng yow at leyser to advise
  Upon thys byll, and pardon myn empryse,
  Growndyd on foly, for lak of provydence,
  On to your lordshep to wryght with owght lycence.

  But wher a man is with a fevyr shake,
  Now hot, now cold, as fallyth by aventure,
  He in hys mynd conjecte wyll, and take
  The nyghest meane to worche hys cuyre,
  More pacyently hys peynys to endure;
  And ryght so I, so it yow not dysplease,
  Wryght in thys wyse my peynys to apease.

  For when I cownt and mak a reknyng
  Betwyx my lyfe, my dethe, and my desyer,
  My lyfe, alas! it servyth of no thyng
  Sythe with your partyng, depertyd my plesyer.
  Wyshyng your presence setyth me on fyer;
  But then your absence dothe my hert so cold,
  That for the peyne I not[68-1] me wher to hold.

  O owght on absence, ther foolys have no grace,
  I mene mysylf, nor yet no wytt to gwye
  Theym owt of peyne to com on to that place,
  Wher as presence may shape a remedye;
  For al dysease, now fye on my folye,
  For I dyspeyryd am of your soone metyng,
  That God I prey me to your presence bryng.

  Farwell, my lord, for I may wryght no more,
  So trowblyd is my hert with hevynesse;
  Envye also, it grewyth me most sore,
  That thys rude byll shall put hym sylf in presse[68-2]
  To se your lordshepe of hys presumptuousnesse
  Er I my sylf; but yett ye shall not mysse
  To have my hert to for my byll, I wys.

  Whyche I comytt and all my hole servyse
  Into your hands, demeane it as you lyst;
  Of it I kepe[68-3] to have no more franchyse
  Then I hertlesse swyrly me wyst,
  Savyng only that it be as tryst,[68-4]
  And to yow trew as evyr was hert, and pleyn
  Tyll cruell dethe depart yt up on tweyn.

  Adew dysport, farwell good companye,
  In all thys world ther is no joye I weene;
  For ther as whyleom I sye with myn iee,
  A lusty lord leepyng upon a grene,
  The soyle is soole, no knyghts ther be seen,
  No ladyse walk ther they wer wont to doone;
  Alas, some folk depertyd hense to soone.

  Some tyme also men myght a wageor make,
  And with ther bowys a ffeld have it tryed,
  Or at the Paame ther, ther plesure for to take,
  Then wer they loose, that now stand as tyed,
  I not[69-1] wher to thys world may be aplyed;
  For all good cher on evyn and on morow,
  Whyche then was made, now tornyth me to sorow.

    [Footnote 67-1: [From Fenn, ii. 304.] It is not apparent by whom
    these verses were written, or to what lord they were addressed.
    They may have been from the Countess of Oxford to her husband
    after he escaped abroad in 1471 (_see_ vol. v., No. 775). Or they
    may have been the production of Lydgate writing in the name of a
    lady parted from her lord. We place them, as Fenn did, for
    convenience, at the end of the letters of Edward’s time.]

    [Footnote 68-1: ‘I not’ stands for ‘I ne wot,’ or ‘I wot not,’
    that is, _I know not_.]

    [Footnote 68-2: Readiness.--F.]

    [Footnote 68-3: I care.--F.]

    [Footnote 68-4: _Quære_, whether this means _sorrowful_ or
    _trusty_.--F.]

    [Footnote 69-1: _See_ Note 1 on last page.]


989-991

ABSTRACTS[69-2]

The letters following are all probably of the reign of Edward IV., but
their dates are quite uncertain.

    [Footnote 69-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


989.

J. PASTON [OF GELSTON] TO RICHARD CROFT

Will not venture to ride in this weather, not being well at ease. Sends
three bills of John Calle and Robert Salle’s receipts and payments
brought by the former. Cannot find the new fermall of Caster here, so he
has given the bearer the key of his coffer at Yarmouth. If you would
ride with him, I think you will find it there. Agrees to John Wynne’s
bills, desiring to be allowed £5 for Byshoppis of Yarmouth, and for
herring delivered to my cousin Loveday; but John Wynne must not sell my
farm barley to pay them, as I wish all the barley in his charge malted
for my Lord Mountjoy. I send a warrant for the sheriff to warn the
persons in Flegge and Yarmouth impanelled between the King and me to be
at Thetford assizes on Wednesday next. Give it to Simon Garrard.

Norwich, Wednesday.


990.

SIR THOMAS HERT TO HIS WORSHIPFUL MISTRESS, [MARGARET PASTON?]

Giving her an account of the numbers of her sheep and lambs at Sparham
from Drayton and Taverham, and those with the shepherd at Heylesdon.

Heylisdon, Thursday before Lady Day the Nativity.[69-3]

  [Under this letter is written in a modern hand--‘37 Hen. 6,’ but
  this date is certainly too early. Thomas Hert was Vicar of Stalham
  in 1482.]

    [Footnote 69-3: The Nativity of St. Mary the Virgin, 8th
    September.]


991.

JOHN DOWNYNG TO EDMUND PASTON

Is a simple servant of his mother and miller of Wood Mill. Complains of
Will. Sybbeson, whom Edmund Paston well knows to have been ‘defawtyf in
many other thyngs,’ and who embezzles wheat and rye, and prevents him
getting any good of a close he holds of Paston’s mother.

North Walsham, Thursday before St. Brice.[70-1]

  [Some memoranda of receipts are written across the back.]

    [Footnote 70-1: St. Brice’s Day is 13th November.]




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Edward V._


992

RICHARD, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, TO LORD NEVILL[71-1]

_To my Lorde Nevyll, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1483 / JUNE 11]

My Lorde Nevyll, I recommaunde me to you as hartely as I can; and as
ever ye love me, and your awne weale and securty, and this Realme, that
ye come to me with that ye may make, defensably arrayde, in all the hast
that ys possyble, and that ye wyll yef credence to . . . . . Richarde
Ratclyff, thys beerrer, whom I nowe do sende to you, enstructed with all
my mynde and entent.

And, my lord, do me nowe gode servyce, as ye have always befor don, and
I trust nowe so to remember you as shalbe the makyng of you and yours.
And God sende you goode fortunes.

Wrytten att London, xj. day of Jun, with the hande of your hertely
lovyng cousyn and master,

  R. GLOUCESTER.

    [Footnote 71-1: [From Fenn, v. 302.] This letter was not a part of
    the Paston correspondence, but was printed by Fenn in the series
    as a letter of much historical interest from a copy given him by
    the Rev. John Brand, secretary to the Society of Antiquaries. The
    following memoranda accompanied the copy:--

    ‘Extract from an ancient MS. of pedigrees, etc., in quarto, late
    in the possession of Sir Walter Blackett, Bart., and now the
    property of John Erasmus Blackett, Esq., Alderman of
    Newcastle-upon-Tyne; p. 333, under title of “_A Coppie of some
    Letters which were found in Rabie Castle after the Rebellion, to
    shew the fashion . . . . of those times_.” The above MS. is of the
    date of James I., though there are several continuations in a more
    modern hand.

    ‘This copy has doubtless been a transcript of an original letter
    of the Duke of Gloucester, afterwards King Richard III., and
    written just before his seizure of the crown.

    ‘Raby Castle is in the county of Durham.’

    Fenn adds that it does not appear clearly who this Lord Nevill
    was. But as the letter was found in Raby Castle after the great
    rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, in
    1569, it was evidently addressed to one of that family of Nevills,
    the heads of which were Earls of Westmoreland. In 1483 the Earl of
    Westmoreland’s name was Ralph Nevill, but he died in the year
    following, and was succeeded in the title by Ralph, son and heir
    of his brother, John, Lord Nevill, who was slain at Towton. It was
    this Ralph, then heir-presumptive to the earldom, who is here
    called Lord Nevill. He had got his father’s attainder reversed in
    1472, and his title of Lord Nevill was recognised. _See_ G. Ele’s
    _Peerage_, viii. 112.]


993

ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF SUFFOLK, TO JOHN PASTON[72-1]

_On to Jan Paston, in haste._

[Sidenote: Not after 1483]

Mastyr Paston, I pray yow that it may plese yow to leve yowr logeyng for
iij. or foro days tyl I may be porved of anodyr, and I schal do as
musche to yowr plesyr. For Godys sake, say me not nay; and I pray yow
rekomaund me to my Lord Chambyrleyn.

  Yowr frend,

  ELIZABETH.

    [Footnote 72-1: [From Fenn, ii. 292.] This is a holograph letter
    of Elizabeth, Duchess of Suffolk, the sister of Edward IV. There
    can be little doubt that the Lord Chamberlain referred to is the
    Lord Hastings who has been very frequently mentioned in this
    correspondence; and if so, the letter cannot be later than 1483,
    as he was beheaded in that year on the 13th June, by order of the
    Protector Richard, Duke of Gloucester. We may therefore place it
    for convenience among the letters of Edward V.’s time, though
    undoubtedly it may be a few years earlier. Facsimiles of the
    original, both back and front, are given by Fenn. It is endorsed
    in the hand of John Paston, the younger (certainly not in that of
    his brother Sir John, as Fenn supposed)--‘Littra Ducisse Suff.’]




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Richard III._


994

JOHN, DUKE OF NORFOLK, TO JOHN PASTON[73-1]

_To my right welbeloved frynde, John Paston, be this delivred in hast._

[Sidenote: 1483 / OCT. 10]

Right welbeloved frynde, I comaunde me to you. It is soo that the
Kentysshmen be up in the weld, and sey that they wol come and robbe the
cite, which I shall lett yf I may.

Therefore I pray you that with alle diligence ye make you redy and com
hidder, and bring with you six talle felaws in harnesse, and ye shall
not lyse yowr labour, that knoweth God, Whoo have you in His keping.

Written at London, the x^th day of October.

  Yowr frend,

  J. NORFFOLK.

    [Footnote 73-1: [From Fenn, ii. 314.] Sir John Howard was created
    Duke of Norfolk on the 28th June 1483, and was killed in the
    battle of Bosworth on the 22nd August 1485. This letter seems to
    have been written in October 1483, when it first became known that
    a series of insurrections were about to take place in different
    counties, of which the Duke of Buckingham was the principal
    leader. It was on the 12th October, just two days after this
    letter was written, that King Richard himself at Lincoln heard of
    Buckingham’s intended treason.]


995

ABSTRACT[74-1]

[Sidenote: 1484]

Proviso to be inserted in an Act of Parliament in favour of Margaret,
widow of John Paston, touching her right to the manor of Castre.

Below is written--‘Guy Fayrefax, Knyght, [Ric. Pygot, one of the King’s
Serjeants of the Law,][74-2] and Roger Townesend, [another of][74-2] the
King’s Serjeants of the Law.

  [This proviso must have been drawn up in connection with some
  measure that was to have come before the Parliament of January 1484.
  Earlier it cannot be, as Roger Townesend was not appointed King’s
  Serjeant till June 1483; and as Margaret Paston died in November
  1484, it could not possibly be later.]

    [Footnote 74-1: [From a MS. in the Bodleian Library.]]

    [Footnote 74-2: Scored out.]


996

ABSTRACT[74-3]

[Sidenote: 1484 / FEB. 8]

Release by John, Duke of Norfolk, and William, Earl of Nottingham,
kinsman and heir of John, late Duke of Norfolk, to John Paston, Esq.,
brother and heir of Sir John Paston, Knight, of all right and title in
the manor of Caister called Redehams, Vawx, and Bosouns by Great
Yarmouth, of which Sir John Paston was disseised unjustly by the said
late Duke.

    [Footnote 74-3: From a Document transcribed by Sandford in his
    Genealogy of the Paston Family, and printed by Mr. Worship in the
    _Norfolk Archæology_.]


997

THE DUKE OF SUFFOLK TO THOMAS JEFFREYS[74-4]

The Duc of Suffolk.

_To Thomas Jeffreys our ffermour of Maundevills, greting._

[Sidenote: 1484 / MAY 1]

We wole and streitly charge you that ye content and paie unto the
bringer herof for money imployed in our houshold thre pound threttenne
shillings and foure pens for such stuff as we our owne person have
promysed, and not to be failed upon our worship. Of the which some of
lxxiij_s._ iiij_d._ so by you contented and paied, we wole and also
stretly charge our auditors for the tyme being, by virtu of this our
writing, signed with our hand, to make you dew and pleyn allowaunce at
your next accompt.

At Wingfeld, the first day of May in the first yer of Kyng Richard the
III^{de}.

SUFFOLK.

And ffayle not on peyn [of] losyng off yor fferme.

    [Footnote 74-4: [From Fenn, ii. 316.]]


998

COMPLAINTS OF JOHN PASTON AGAINST HIS UNCLE WILLIAM[75-1]

[Sidenote: 1484]

All so the seyde John Paston, now compleynaunt, seyth that John Paston,
fadyr off the same John, was seased off the maner callyd Hollwellhawe,
wyth th’appurtenaunces in Estodenham, joyntly wyth all the londis,
tenementes, rentes, and services, whyche sume tyme were John Jerham,
Ewstase Rows, John Davy,[75-2] vikere off the chyrche off Estodenham,
ande Water Danyell, or any off thers, lyeng in the townys off
Estodenham, Mateshalle, Mateshalebergh, and othir townys adjoynyng, ande
off all the londis and tenementes, rentes, services, and lybertes wyth
ther appurtenaunces callyd Toleys, lyeng in the townys off Wymondham and
Carleton and othir townys adyoynyng, whyche sume tyme were William
Thuxston; and off the scite off on mese [_messuage_] wyth a pece londe
lyenge in a croffte to the same mese adyoynyng, wyche is accomptyde
xiiij. acres off londe wyth th’appurtenaunces, callyd Colneys, othyr wys
callyd Whynnes in Carleton ----[75-3] in hys demeane as off ffee; ande
so beyng seased ther off, up on trust enffeffede William Yelverton,
Justys, John Fastolff, Knyght, Myles Stapelton, Knyght, and othir, to be
hadde to them and theyr heyrs for ever, be the fores wher off they were
ther off seased in theyr demeane as off ffee, ande afftyr the seyd
ffeffment in forme afforseyd mad, the seyd John Paston the fadyr
disseassed. The ryght off the whyche maner, londis, tenementes, and
othir the premysses, afftyr the desses of the seyd John the fadyr, owith
to come to the seyd John, now compleynaunt, as sone and heyr off the
seyd John Paston, ffor as myche as the seyd John the fadyr made no wylle
nor mencyon of the aforseyd maner, londis, tenementes, nor off othir the
premysses, whyche maner, londis, and tenementes, and othir the premysses
the seyd William Paston hath, and agenst the cours of the lawe ocupyeth.

Item, the seid John requerith an astate to be takyn in those londys
lymyted to William the sone for deffaut off issu off Clement Paston by
the will of there fadir accordyng to the seid will, as well as in those
londis that ar or shuld be purchased with the m^l. [1000] mark accordyng
to th’endentur mad by twyn th’executors of William Paston, Justice, that
is to sey, to the seid William the son, and to the eyres of his body,
and for defaute of yssue of his bodye, to remayn to th’eyers of William
Paston, Justice, which the seid John is.

All so the seyd John Paston, now compleynaunt, seyth that ther be
decayed at Marlyngfford and Oxenhed be meane off th’enterupsion off the
seyd William tweyn water melles, wher off iche was letyn ffor x. marke
be yer. And all so othir howsyng be the same ockasion at Oxenhed,
Marlyngfford, Stansted, and Orwelbury decayed to the hurt off the seyd
John Paston off v. C. [500] mark whech the seyd John Paston desyreth to
be recompensede.

Item, the seid John axith of the seid William for wast don in the maner
of Paston for lak of reparacion, xl_li._

Item, the seid William hath takyn awey owth of the maners of John
Paston, that is to sey, of hes maners of Paston, Oxened, Marlyngford,
Stansted, and Horwelburye, siche stoff and greynys, catell and
hotilementis of the seid maners as were agreyd be the executors of the
seyd William Paston, Justyse, to be left and latyn with the seid maners
to the value of xl_li._

Item, the seid John axith to be restored to all the evydence longyng to
the maners aforesaid and other the premysses which the seid William
wrongfully witholdith.

Item, the seid John axith to hys possession which he hath of [and] in
the maner of Caster and other maners adyongnyng, the relesse of all such
title and interest as the seid William hath be wey of feffement in the
foresaid maner and maners, in like forme as other his cofeffes have in
tyme past relassed to Sir John Paston, whoos eyre the seid John is.

Also, the seid John Paston desireth the performance of diverse
comenauntis and articles conteyned in diverse indentures and writynges
mad be the avise of the reverend fadir in God, William, Bisschoppe of
Lyncolne,[76-1] supervisour of the testement of the seid William Paston,
Justice, bytwix th’executors of the same William Paston for kepyng of
the trewe intent and will of the seid William Paston, Justice, as by the
same indentures and writynges redye to be schewed more pleynlye shall
appere, the entent and performance of which writyng is interupted and
brokyn by the seid William Paston and his meanys to the hurt and damage
off the seyd John Paston, now compleynaunt off ----.[76-2]

Item, the seid William hath, contray to trouuth and conscience, vexed
and trouubled and put to cost and charge the seid John nowe be the space
of v. yer saffe a quarter,[76-3] and hath distorbede the same John to
take and perceyve th’issus and profetes off the same maners, to the hurt
and damage off the seyd John in defendyng of his right off and in the
maners afforeseyd of ij. m^l. mark, besyde greffe, gret labour and
disseace that the seid John hath dayly be putt onto by th’okcasion
afforseyd.[77-1]

Item, accordyng to the will of William Paston, Justice, the seid John
axith to be restored to parth of such goodis as hath ben dispendid by
John Paston the fader, Sir John Paston, and the seid John nowe
compleynaunt, in defence, kepyng, and recoveryng of such londis as were
William Paston, Justice, which draweth above the summa of m^l_li._

Item, where on ----[77-2] Lomnor had a cofur in kepyng and and D.m^l.
mark in the same be extymasion to the use of John Paston, fadir of the
forsayed Sir John and John, the seid William Paston fraudelently
atteyned the seid cofur wyth the seyd sume of money after the dissece of
the seid John the fadir, and had it in his kepyng serteyn dayes, and did
with it his pleasur unknowyn to the seid Sir John Paston and John
Paston, his brother; and after at Herry Colettes[77-3] house the seid
William brought the seid cofur to the seid John Paston, Knyght, and
there openyd the seid cofur, where was then lefte but CC. old noblis
which wer by extymacion in value C_li._ And the seid William toke ther
the seid gold awey with hym, ageyn the will of seid Sir John, and
witholdith the same, whereof the seyd John preyeth to be restored.

Item, the seid William atteynyd and gate a payer of basons of silver and
parte or all gilt from the seid Sir John Paston and John Paston, now
compleynaunt, abouuth such season as he toke the cofur and coyne
aforerehersed, which basons were in value C. mark; and the seid William
yet witholdith the seid basons, to the whyche the seyd John preyeth also
to be restored.

Item, the seid William gate in to his possession a charger of silver in
value x. marke, and iij. bollys of silver that were in kepyng of
Bacheler Water, a Frier Carmelit of Norwich, to th’entent that a certeyn
coost shuld have ben doon upon the liberarye of the Friers Carmelites
aforesaid for the sowlis of William Paston, Justice, and Augnes, his
wiff; which charger and bollys the seid William yet withholdith and
kepith to his owne use, and therfore the seid charges ar not fulfylled.

Item, the seid John axith restitucion of suche inportable charges as the
seid William hathe put the forsaid Sir John onto by the space of many
yeres, as in plesures doyng and rewardis, which apperith by writyng of
the hande of the seid Sir John; which pleasures and charges the seid Sir
John was constreyned to doo in defence of the seid William; wher of the
seid John axeth to have amendys of C^l. mark.

Item, by the occacion and meanys of the seid William, the seid Sir John
was constreyned to lende onto the Reverende Fadere in God, George, late
Archebsschop of York[77-4] m^l. mark, which was nat payed ageyn by the
summa of C_li._ The seid John axith to be restorid ther of.

Item, the seid William hath fellyd tymbre and wodys in the maners of the
seid John, that is to sey, the maners of Oxened and Marlyngford, to the
hurth of the seid John of xx_li._

Item, the seyd John Paston, compleynaunt, axith to be restoryd to alle
syche money as hathe be takyn and dyspendyd by alle siche persones as
have ben assigned by meanes of the seyd Wylliam to distorbe and interupt
the seyd John, compleynaunt, of hys ryght, tyghtyll, possessyon,
entrest, of and in the maners, londis, and tenementes, and other the
premysses dwryng the seyd v. yer sauff a quarter, as well as to all
syche money as hathe ben dyspendyd dwryng the seyd v. yer sauff a
quarter by the servauntys of the seyd compleynaunt by hym assigned to
tery and abyd up on the seyd maners, londes, and tenementes, and other
the premysses ther, to kepe the possessyon of the seyd compleynaunt,
whyche extendith to the some of xl_li._ and above.

Item, the seyd John, compleynaunt, axith to be restoryd to all syche
money as hathe bene receyved by meanys of the seyd William, dwryng the
seyd v. yer sauff a quarter, of syche as ar or have ben fermors or
tenauntes of the maners, londis, and tenementis aforseyd duryng the seyd
season, as well as to all syche money as is not levyable of dyvers of
the seyd fermors and tenauntes fallyn in poverte sythe the trowblows
season of the v. yer sauff a quarter befor rehersed, whyche extendeth to
the some of CC_li._ or above.

    [Footnote 75-1: [From Add. Charter 17,257, B.M.] It appears from
    the contents that this paper must have been drawn up nearly five
    years after Sir John Paston’s death. It is a corrected draft,
    apparently of a Bill in Chancery, and some of the corrections are
    in Sir John Paston’s hand.]

    [Footnote 75-2: He was vicar of East Tuddenham from 1398 to 1434.]

    [Footnote 75-3: Blank in MS.]

    [Footnote 76-1: William Alnwick, Bishop of Lincoln, who died in
    1449.]

    [Footnote 76-2: Blank in MS.]

    [Footnote 76-3: Originally written ‘a yere and more,’ and
    corrected.]

    [Footnote 77-1: This paragraph is very much corrected.]

    [Footnote 77-2: Blank in MS.]

    [Footnote 77-3: Father of the celebrated Dean Colet.]

    [Footnote 77-4: George Nevill, Archbishop of York, died on the 8th
    June 1476.]

  [[Lomnor had a cofur in kepyng and and D.m^l. mark
  _text unchanged: “and and” duplicated at mid-line_

  George, late Archebsschop of York
  _spelling unchanged_

  Footnote 75-3
  _footnote text has “4” for “3”_]]


999

MARGERY PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[78-1]

_To my ryght worschipful husbond, John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1484(?) / DEC. 24]

Ryght worschipful husbond, I recomaund me onto you. Plese it you to wete
that I sent your eldest sunne to my Lady Morlee[78-2] to have knolage
wat sports wer husyd in her hows in Kyrstemesse next folloyng aftyr the
decysse of my lord, her husbond; and sche seyd that ther wer non
dysgysyngs, ner harpyng, ner lutyng, ner syngyn, ner non lowde dysports,
but pleyng at the tabyllys, and schesse, and cards. Sweche dysports sche
gave her folkys leve to play and non odyr.

Your sunne dede hese heyrne [_errand_] ryght wele as ye shal her aftyr
this. I sent your yonger sunne to the Lady Stabylton,[79-1] and sche
seyd acordyng to my Lady Morlees seyng in that, and as sche hadde seyn
husyd in places of worschip[79-2] ther as sche hathe beyn.

I pray you that ye woll asur to your some man at Caster to kepe your
botry, for the mane that ye lefte with me woll not take upon hym to
breve[79-3] dayly as ye commandyt. He seyth he hath not usyd to geve a
rekenyng nothyr of bred nor alle [_ale_] tyll at the wekys end; and he
seyth he wot well that he shuld not condenyth [_give satisfaction_] and
therfor I soposse he shall not abyd, and I trow ye shall be fayne to
purveye another man for Symond, for ye har never the nerer a wysse man
for hym.

I ham sory that ye shall not [be] at hom be for Crystemes. I pray you
that ye woll come as sone as ye may. I shall thynke myself halfe a
wedow, because ye shal not be at home, &c. God have you in Hys kepyng.

Wretyn on Crestemes Evyn.

  By yor,

  M. P.

    [Footnote 78-1: [From Fenn, ii. 330.] Fenn supposes with great
    probability that this letter was written in 1484, the year of
    Margaret Paston’s death. No earlier date is possible, seeing that
    even in 1484 John Paston’s eldest son was only in his seventh
    year, and he had at the date of this letter two sons capable of
    being sent on messages; so that, if anything, we should be
    inclined to put it later. But we know of no later death in the
    family that could have occasioned the writing of such a letter,
    and the time of Margaret Paston’s death and of the proving of her
    will agree very well with Fenn’s hypothesis. From the calendar
    prefixed to an old MS. missal in the possession of the late Mr. C.
    W. Reynell, I found that she died on the 4th November 1484. Her
    will was proved at Norwich on the 18th December following.]

    [Footnote 78-2: Widow of William Lovel, Lord Morley, who died the
    26th of July 1476.--F.]

    [Footnote 79-1: Sir Miles Stapleton died in 1466. His widow
    Catherine seems to have married in the following year Sir Richard
    Harcourt of Ellenhale (Blomefield, ix. 321), but, according to a
    practice not uncommon at that time, she may have retained the name
    of Lady Stapleton.]

    [Footnote 79-2: ‘Places of worship’; _i.e._, in families of
    distinction.]

    [Footnote 79-3: To make up accounts.]


1000

ABSTRACT[79-4]

STANSTED AND HARWELLBURY

[Sidenote: 1484(?)]

The manor of Stansted is in the county of Suffolk. The estate of this
manor passed not by the deed that the estate was taken by at
Huntingfeld, in Norf.,[80-1] but I claim this manor by my mother’s gift.
‘This manor is but a mile from Clopton’s and not far from Smalbrigge,
where your Grace is now.’ John Barell is farmer of this manor, who, when
I came to your Grace just after my mother’s death, confessed before your
servants, Piers Rumbold and William Smyth, that he was privy of mine
estate in my mother’s days, and took the farm of me at that time.
‘Madam, this is the man ye sent your servant W. Smyth to, for to keep
the possession there; and after he had tarried there awhile he took a
promise of the farmer that he should pay no money to nobody without
commandment from your Grace; contrary to which promise, by the favour of
some folks that your Grace can deem, he hath paid my nephew a £10 or
£20.’ I think, Madam, you need send no man to keep possession there; but
your Grace might send a servant thither to show the tenants your
displeasure, inasmuch as he hath broken his promise with your Grace, and
threaten to distrain.

The manor of Harwellbury is in Hertfordshire, four miles from your manor
of Weston Baldok[80-2] and two from Roiston. This manor also passed not
by the estate taken in Norfolk, not being in the same shire. Of this
manor ‘he’[80-3] received no money, for the farmers are true and fear
not his threats. The manor is worth £8.

    [Footnote 79-4: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This is a paper of notes
    relating to the manors of Stansted in Suffolk and Harwellbury in
    Herts, addressed to a lady who is styled ‘Madam’ and ‘your Grace,’
    and who, though not named, was undoubtedly the Duchess of Norfolk.
    Compare No. 962. The writer is perhaps John Paston of Gelston; in
    which case the date must be after 1484, as he speaks of his mother
    as being dead. More probably it was his uncle William, and John
    Paston is the nephew referred to in the paper itself. But even in
    that case the document cannot be five years earlier, as Agnes
    Paston died in 1479.]

    [Footnote 80-1: Should be Suffolk.]

    [Footnote 80-2: The Dukes of Norfolk of the family of Mowbray
    owned this manor.]

    [Footnote 80-3: The writer’s nephew?]

  [[Footnote 79-4
  the document cannot be five years earlier
  _printed as shown: missing “over”, “more than” or similar?_]]


1001

PROCLAMATION AGAINST HENRY TUDOR[81-1]

R. R.

Ricardus, etc. salutem. Precipimus tibi, etc.

[Sidenote: 1485 / JUNE 23]

Forasmoche as the Kyng our sovereign Lord hath certeyn knowlege that
Piers, Bisshop of Exeter,[81-2] Jasper Tydder,[81-3] son of Owen Tydder,
callyng hymself Erle of Pembroke, John, late Erle of Oxon,[81-4] and Sir
Edward Wodevyle,[81-5] with other dyvers his rebelles and traytours,
disabled and atteynted by the auctorite of the High Court of Parlement,
of whom many be knowen for open murdrers, advoutrers [_adulterers_], and
extorcioners, contrary to the pleasure of God, and a yenst all trouth,
honour, and nature, have forsakyn there naturall contrey, takyng them
first to be under th’obeisaunce of the Duke of Bretayn,[81-6] and to hym
promysed certeyn thyngs whiche by him and his counsell were thought
thynggs to gretly unnaturall and abominable for them to graunt, observe,
kepe, and perfourme, and therfore the same utterly refused.

The seid traytours,[82-1] seyng[82-2] the seid Duke and his counsell
wolde not aide nor socour theym ner folowe there wayes, privily departed
oute of his contrey in to Fraunce, and[82-3] there takyng theym to be
under the obeisaunce of the Kynggs auncient enemy, Charlys,[82-4]
callyng hymself Kyng of Fraunce, and to abuse and blynde the comons of
this seid Realme, the seid rebelles and traitours have chosyn to be
there capteyn one Henry Tydder,[82-5] son of Edmond Tydder, son of Owen
Tydder,[82-6] whiche of his ambicioness and insociable[82-7]
covetise[82-8] encrocheth[82-9] and usurpid[82-10] upon hym the name and
title of royall astate of this Realme of Englond, where unto he hath no
maner interest, right, title, or colour, as every man wele
knowyth;[82-11] for he is discended of bastard blood bothe of ffather
side and of mother side, for the seid Owen the graunfader was bastard
borne, and his moder was doughter unto John, Duke of Somerset, son unto
John, Erle of Somerset, sone unto Dame Kateryne Swynford, and of
ther[82-12] indouble[82-13] avoutry [_adultery_] gotyn, wherby it
evidently apperith that no title can nor may [be][82-14] in hym, which
fully entendeth to entre this Reame, purposyng a conquest. And if he
shulde atcheve his fals entent and purpose, every man is lif, livelod,
and goddes shulde be in his hands, liberte, and disposicion, wherby
sholde ensue the disheretyng and distruccion of all the noble and
worshipfull blode of this Reame for ever, and to the resistence and
withstondyng wherof every true and naturall Englishman born must ley to
his hands for his owen suerte and wele.

And to th’entent that the seid Henry Tydder myght the rather atcheve his
fals intent and purpose by the aide, supporte, and assistence of the
Kynggs seid auncient enemy of Fraunce,[83-1] hath covenaunted and
bargayned with hym and all the counsell of Fraunce to geve up and relese
inperpetuite all the right, title, and cleyme that the Kyng[es] of
Englond have, had, and ought to have, to the Crowne and Reame of
Fraunce, to gether with the Duchies of Normandy, Anjoy, and Maygne,
Gascoyn and Guyne, castell[es] and townys of Caleys, Guysnes, Hammes,
with the marches apperteynyng to the same,[83-2] and discevir and
exclude the armes of Fraunce oute of the armes of Englond for ever.

And in more prove and shewing of his seid purpose of conquest, the seid
Henry Tidder hath goven as well to dyvers of the seid Kynggs enemys as
to his seid rebelles and traitours, archebisshoprikes, bisshoprikes, and
other dignitees spirituels, and also the ducheez, erledomez, baronyes,
and other possessions and inheritaunces of knyghts, squyres, gentilmen,
and other the Kynggs true subjetts withynne the Reame, and entendith
also to chaunge and subverte the lawes of the same, and to enduce and
establisse newe lawes and ordenaunces amongez the Kynggs seid
subjetts.[83-2] And over this, and beside the alienacions of all the
premyssez into the possession of the Kynggs seid auncient enemys to the
grettest anyntisshment,[83-3] shame, and rebuke that ever myght falle to
this seid land, the seid Henry Tydder and others, the Kynggs rebelles
and traitours aforeseid, have extended [_intended_] at there comyng, if
they may be of power,[84-1] to do the most cruell murdrers, slaughterys,
and roberys, and disherisons that ever were seen in eny Cristen reame.

For the wich, and other inestymable daungers to be escheuved, and to
th’entent that the Kynggs seid rebelles, traitours, and enemys[84-2] may
be utterly put from there seid malicious and fals purpose[84-3] and sone
discomforted,[84-4] if they enforce to land,[84-5] the Kyng our
soveraign Lord[84-6] willith, chargeth, and comaundith all and everyche
of the naturall and true subgetts of this his Reame to call the
premyssez to there mynds, and like gode and true Englishmen to endover
themselfs with all there powers for the defence of them, there wifs,
chylderyn, and godes, and heriditaments ayenst the seid malicious
purposes and conspiracions which the seid auncient enemes[84-7] have
made with the Kynggs seid rebelles and traitours[84-8] for the fynall
distruccion of this lande as is aforesaid. And our said soveraign Lord,
as a wele willed, diligent, and coragious Prynce, wel put his moost
roiall persone to all labour and payne necessary in this behalve for the
resistence and subduyng of his seid enemys, rebells, and traitours[84-9]
to the moost comforte, wele, and suerte of all[84-10] his true and
feithfull liege men and subgetts.

And over this, our seid soveraign Lord willith and comaundith all his
seid subgetts to be redy in there most defensible arraye to do his
Highnes servyce of werre, when thy be opyn proclamacion, or otherwise
shall be comaunded so to do, for the resistence of the Kynggs seid
rebelles, traitours, and enemyes. Et hoc sub periculo, &c.--T. me ipso
apud Westmonasterium, xxiij. die Junij, Anno regni nostri secundo.

    [Footnote 81-1: [From Fenn, ii. 318.] The MS., as Fenn tells us,
    was endorsed in an ancient hand, ‘Kent Cherfys
    [_Sheriffs_].--Copia literæ Regis R. III. persuadentis subditos
    suos ad resistendum Henr’ Tydder, postea Regem Angliæ ac
    declarantis a quo idem Henricus descendebat.’ Another but
    imperfect copy of this proclamation will be found in the Harleian
    MS., No. 433, f. 220 b. A similar proclamation had been issued on
    the 7th December 1484, of which a copy will also be found in the
    same Harleian volume at folio 273 b. Sir Henry Ellis has also
    printed in his _Original Letters_ (2 Ser. i. 162) a copy of this
    proclamation as set forth in the original warrant for issuing it,
    which the King addressed to the Bishop of Lincoln as Chancellor.
    The MS. followed by Ellis was a transcript from one of the records
    formerly in the Tower. I have compared these different texts
    throughout with that printed by Fenn, and noted all variations
    that are of any consequence. The two Harleian texts I have called
    A. and B., the former being that of the proclamation issued on the
    7th December preceding. The text printed by Ellis I have called
    E.]

    [Footnote 81-2: Peter Courtney, Bishop of Exeter, after the
    miscarriage of the Duke of Buckingham’s conspiracy, fled into
    Bretagne to the Earl of Richmond, who, after he became Henry VII.,
    promoted this Prelate to the See of Winchester in 1486, in which
    he died in 1492.--F.]

    [Footnote 81-3: Jasper Tudor of Hatfield, half-brother to Henry
    VI. He was created Duke of Bedford in 1485.]

    [Footnote 81-4: John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, who had escaped from
    the Castle of Hammes.--F.]

    [Footnote 81-5: Sir Edward Wodevile, brother to the Queen of
    Edward IV.--F. The names given in text A. are ‘Piers, Bisshop of
    Excestre, Thomas Grey, late Marques Dorset, Jasper, late Erle of
    Pembroche, John, late Erle of Oxenford, and Sir Edward Widevile.’]

    [Footnote 81-6: Francis II., the last Duke of Bretagne, was
    overthrown by Charles VIII., King of France, and died in
    1488.--F.]

    [Footnote 82-1: ‘The said traytours.’ They. A.]

    [Footnote 82-2: that. A. B. E.]

    [Footnote 82-3: ‘and’ omitted in A. B. and E.]

    [Footnote 82-4: Charles VIII. ascended the throne in 1483, and
    died in 1498.--F.]

    [Footnote 82-5: Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond, who in 1483 became
    King of England, by the title of Henry VII.--F.]

    [Footnote 82-6: ‘one Herry . . . . Owen Tydder’ oon Herry late
    calling himself Erle of Richemond. A.]

    [Footnote 82-7: ‘ambicious and insaciable.’ A. B. E.]

    [Footnote 82-8: ‘stirred and excited by the confederacie of the
    Kinges said rebelles and traytours,’ added in A.]

    [Footnote 82-9: Here text B. comes to an end.]

    [Footnote 82-10: ‘usurpeth.’ E.]

    [Footnote 82-11: From here to the end of the paragraph is omitted
    in A.]

    [Footnote 82-12: ‘ther’ her. A.]

    [Footnote 82-13: This either means double adultery, that is
    adultery on both sides; or indubitable, undoubted adultery.--F.
    I suspect the true reading to be ‘and of her in double avowtry
    gotyn.’ It is a great question whether John, Earl of Somerset,
    John of Gaunt’s eldest son by Catherine Swynford, was not born
    during the life of her lawful husband as well as during that of
    John of Gaunt’s lawful wife.--See _Excerpta Historica_, 155-6.]

    [Footnote 82-14: Supplied from E.]

    [Footnote 83-1: The beginning of this sentence in A. is as
    follows:--‘And to th’entent to accheve the same by th’aide,
    support, and assistence of the Kinges seid auncyent ennemyes and
    of this his royaume.’]

    [Footnote 83-2: From the words ‘and discevir’ to the sentence
    beginning ‘And over this,’ all is omitted in A.]

    [Footnote 83-3: Aneantisement--anientised is used by Chaucer in
    his Tale of Melibeus, for reducing to nothing.--F.]

    [Footnote 84-1: ‘if they may be of power,’ omitted in A.]

    [Footnote 84-2: rebelles and traytours. A.]

    [Footnote 84-3: malicious purposes. A.]

    [Footnote 84-4: discomfited. A. E.]

    [Footnote 84-5: Or rather, made good their landing by force.--F.]

    [Footnote 84-6: desireth. A. E.]

    [Footnote 84-7: the auncyentes ennemyes of this lande. A.]

    [Footnote 84-8: ‘and traitours,’ omitted in A.]

    [Footnote 84-9: rebelles, traitours, and enemyes. A. In which text
    the proclamation ends with these words, and is followed by the
    usual words addressed to the Chancellor as his authority for
    making out the proclamation: ‘And thise oure lettres shall be your
    sufficient warrant in that behalve.’ This warrant to the
    Chancellor is dated ‘at oure Castell of Notyngham, the xxj. day of
    Juyn, the secund yere of our reigne,’ two days before the
    proclamation was issued.]

    [Footnote 84-10: and singlier. A.]

  [[Footnote 82-6
  ‘one Herry . . . . Owen Tydder’
  _body text has “Henry”: confusion with following MS. citation?_

  Footnote 82-11, 82-12
  Footnote 84-9, 84-10
  _each pair of footnotes printed as shown_

  the Kyng our soveraign Lord[84-6] willith
  _misplaced footnote tag? note 84-6 refers to verb_]]


1002

THE DUKE OF NORFOLK TO JOHN PASTON[85-1]

_To my welbelovyd frend, John Paston, be thys byll delyveryd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1485 / AUG.]

Welbelovyd frend, I cummaunde me to yow, letyng yow to undyrstond that
the Kyngs enmysse be a land, and that the Kyng wold hafe set forthe as
uppon Monday but only for Howre Lady Day;[85-2] but for serten he gothe
forward as uppon Tewsday, for a servant of myne browt to me the
sertente.

Wherfor, I pray yow that ye met with me at Bery,[85-3] for, be the grace
of God, I purposse to lye at Bery as uppon Tewsday nyght, and that ye
brynge with yow seche company of tall men as ye may goodly make at my
cost and charge, be seyd that ye have promysyd the Kyng; and I pray yow
ordeyne them jakets of my levery, and I shall contente yow at your
metyng with me.

  Yower lover,

  J. NORFFOLK.

    [Footnote 85-1: [From Fenn, ii. 334.] This letter must have been
    written in August 1485, some days after the landing of the Earl of
    Richmond, afterwards Henry VII., at Milford Haven.]

    [Footnote 85-2: The Assumption of Our Lady, 15th of August.]

    [Footnote 85-3: Bury St. Edmund’s in Suffolk.]




THE PASTON LETTERS

_Henry VII._


1003

DAME ELIZABETH BROWNE TO JOHN PASTON[86-1]

_To my ryght worchepfull and hertly beloved nevew, John Paston, Sqwyer._

[Sidenote: 1485 / SEPT. 23]

Right worchepfull, and my ryght hertly beloved nevew, I recomand me to
yow. And wher as ye desier me to send yow woord whether my brodyr John
Paston, your fadyr, was with my fadyr and hys, whom God assoyle, duryng
hys last syknesse and at the tyme of hys dissease at Seynt Brydis, or
nowght.

Nevew, I assarteyn yow upon my feythe and poore honore that I was
xiiij., xv. yer or xvj. yer old, and[86-2] at Seynt Brydis with my fadyr
and my modyr when my fadyrs last syknesse took hym, and tyll he was
disseassid; and I dare depose befor ony persone honorable that when my
fadyrs last siknesse tooke hym, my brodyr your fadyr was in Norffolk,
and he came not to London tyll aftyr that my fadyr was disseassid, and
that can Sir William Cootyng[86-3] and Jamys Gressham record, for they
bothe were my fadyrs clerkys at that tyme. And I remembre and wot well
that Jamys Gressham was with my fadyr at Seynt Brydys duryng all hys
siknesse and at hys disseasse, and thys wyll I wyttnesse whyle I leve
for a trowthe, as knowith God, Whom I beseche to preserve you and yours.

And, nevew, I prey yow recomand to my neese your wyff, whom I wold be
glad to se onys a yen in London, wher thys bylle was wretyn, signed with
myn hand, and sealed with my seale [the Thursday next befor
Whyghtsonday, the second yer of Kyng Richard the Thred],[87-1] the
xxiij. daye of September the first yer of the reyngne of Kyng Herry the
vij^{th}.

  Your loveing awnte,

  EL[IZA]BETH BROWNE.

    [Footnote 86-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The MS. from which this
    letter is printed is not in the handwriting of Dame Eliz. Browne.
    It is a corrected draft in the handwriting of John Paston, with
    the address at the head.]

    [Footnote 86-2: The words ‘xiiij. ---- old, and’ are an
    interlineation, J. P. apparently did not know his sister’s exact
    age at the time and wished her to supply it.]

    [Footnote 86-3: Rector of Swainsthorpe from 1444 to 1450, and of
    Titchwell from 1450 to 1457. He was presented to the former living
    by Judge Paston and John Dam.]

    [Footnote 87-1: This date is scratched through with the pen.]

  [[Footnote 86-2
  apparently did not know his sister’s exact age at the time
  _text unchanged: error for “aunt’s”?_]]


1004

ELIZABETH, COUNTESS OF SURREY, TO JOHN PASTON[87-2]

_To myn ryght worshepfull cosyn, John Paston, Esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1485 / OCT. 3]

Myn ryght worshipfull cosyn, I recomawnde me hertly to you, thankyng you
of your greet kyndnes and lovyng disposicion towardys myn lord and me at
all tymes, which I pray God I may leve to see the acquytell ther of to
your plesure, prayeng you of your good continuans.

Cosyn, I shewyd you myn mynde that I wolde have myn shildern to
Thorpe,[87-3] wher in, God yelde you, it pleasyd you to sey that I
shulde have hors of you to help to conveye them thyder; but now I
undirstonde myn Lord Fitz Walter[87-4] hath dischargyd myn lordys
servauntes thens, affermyng up on them that they shulde have had
unfittyng langage of the Kynges Grace. Cosyn, I trust that ye and all
the jentilmen of the shire, which have had knowleche of myn lordes
servauntes, kan sey that her to for they have not ben of that
disposicion to be lavas of theyr tungys, whan they had moore cause of
booldnes than they have nowe. I wolde not have thowght myn Lord
Fitzwalter wolde have takyn so ferforth displeasure for the keepyng of
x. or xij. men at Thorpe; I woot weell ther exceded not iij. mees[88-1]
meet, good and bad. I truste, all thow I weer a soel woman, to mayntene
so many at the leeste, what so evyr I dyde moore.

I trustyd to have fowndyn myn Lord Fitzwalter better lord to me, seyng
whan I was wyth myn Lord of Oxenforth, up on myn desyre and request at
that tyme made un to hym, he promysed me to be good lord to myn lord and
me, wher of I praye you to put hym in remembrauns, trustyng yit be the
meene of you to fynde hym better lord to me her aftyr.

I have fownde myn Lord of Oxenforth singuler very good and kynde lord to
myn lord and me, and stedefaste in hys promys, wher by he hath wonne myn
lordys service as longe as he leevyth, and me to be hys trewe beedwoman
terme of myn lyve; for hym I drede mooste, and yit as hyther to I fynde
hym beste. I pray you good cosyn, the rather by your meane, that I may
have the continuauns of hys good lordship, and to myn poore power I
truste to deserve it. I pray you, cosyn, that thys byll may recomawnde
[me][88-2] to myn Lady Brews and to myn cosyn, your wyf.

From Mynster, in the Yle of Shepey, the iij^de day of Octobre. I pray
you yeve credens to the berer of thys, and to Thomas Jenney, whan he
comyth to you.

  [88-3]Your faythefoull cosyene,

  E. SURREY.

    [Footnote 87-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter must have
    been written either in 1485 or in 1486. Thomas Howard, Earl of
    Surrey, was taken prisoner at the battle of Bosworth on the 22nd
    August 1485, and was not released from confinement till 1487, in
    which latter year also John Paston, to whom this letter is
    addressed, was knighted at the battle of Stoke on the 16th June.
    Most likely the letter is of the year 1485, at the beginning of
    the Earl’s imprisonment, and when Henry VII. had been just six
    weeks upon the throne.]

    [Footnote 87-3: In Norfolk.--F.]

    [Footnote 87-4: John Ratcliff, Lord Fitzwalter, who was summoned
    to Parliament in September 1485.]

    [Footnote 88-1: A mess was a party of four at dinner.]

    [Footnote 88-2: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 88-3: These last words were written by the Countess, the
    letter by her secretary.--F.]


1005

ELIZABETH, COUNTESS OF SURREY, TO WILLIAM HARWARD[89-1]

[Sidenote: 1485, or later]

Wylliam Harward, I woll that ze delyver to Robert Thorppe of Norwych v.
marc off the next money that ze gadyr; for he hath lent it me, and I
have sygned hym to be payed of yow as sone he comyth hom.

  E. SURREY.

    [Footnote 89-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 228.] This brief note, like
    No. 1004, was probably written during the imprisonment of the
    writer’s husband. The text is entirely crossed through, doubtless
    to show that the transaction was closed.]


1006

THE DUKE OF SUFFOLK TO JOHN PASTON[89-2]

_To our trusty and welbeloved John Paston, Sheriff of Suffolk and
Norfolk._

THE DUC OF SUFFOLK.

[Sidenote: 1485 / OCT. 20]

Right welbeloved, we grete you well. And for asmuche as the King our
sovereigne Lord hath late addressed his letters of comission undre his
seale unto us, reciting by the same that his highnesse undrestondith
certayn his rebells associate to his old enmys of Scotlond, entending
not only to trowble his peax, the nobles and subjects of this Realme to
destroy, their goods and possessions to spoill, and reward at thair
liberties, but also the lawes of this lond and holy Chirche to subvert.

Our said moost drad soverayn Lord, as a Cristen Prince, . . . . . . . .
his said enmys and rebels to resist, hath assigned and comaunded us to
do all maner . . . . and others defensible able to labour, as well
archers as hobbyllers,[90-1] to come before us and charge them . . . . .
armed and arayed, every man aftre his degre and power, to attend uppon
his person, and uppon us, to do him service in defence as well of the
Chirche as of the said nobles and subjects of this Realm, against his
said enmys and rebels.

We therfore wull, and in our said sovereigne Lords name straitly charge
and comaunde you, that in all possible hast ye do this to be
proclamed:--And that all maner men able to do the King service, as well
knights, esquiers, and gentlemen, as townships and hundreds, as well
within franchesse and libertes as without, within the counties of
Suffolk and Norffolk, and that they be charged to be redy at all tymes
uppon an howre warnyng, and ordered according to the last comission
afore this, to attend uppon his Grace and uppon us to do him service,
whatsoever they shalbe comaunded, not failing herof, as ye wull answer
at your perile. Goven at Long Stratton, the xx. day of October.

And forthermore, that ye yeve credence unto our servaunt this bringer,
as this same day we receyved the Kings commission at iiij. aftre none.

  SUFFOLK, yor frende.

    [Footnote 89-2: [From Fenn, ii. 326.] John Paston was Sheriff of
    Norfolk in the first year of Henry VII., and entered on his duties
    at Michaelmas 1485. This letter therefore is of that year.]

    [Footnote 90-1: Light horsemen.]


1007

MARGERY PASTON TO JOHN PASTON[90-2]

_To my mastyr, John Paston, be this delyvird._

[Sidenote: 1486 / JAN. 21]

Ryght reverent and wortshepfull syre, in my most umbill weysse I
recomaunde me to you, desyryng to here of your welfare, the wytche I
beseche God to preserve to His plesur and so your hartes desyir. Syr,
I thank you for the venyson that ye sent me; and youre schepe is seylyd
owt of the havene as this daye.

Syr, I send you be my brodyr Wyllem your stomachere of damaske. As for
youre teppet of velvet, it is not here; An seythe that ye put yt in your
casket at London.

Syr, your chyldryn be in goode helle, bellsside be God.

Syr, I prey you sende me the gowild, that I spak to you of be the nexst
man that comythe to Norwytche.

Syr, your mast that laye at Yermowyth is letyn to a scheppe of Hull for
xiij_s._ iiij_d._, and if there fawyll ony hurt ther to, ye schall have
a newe mast ther for.

No mor to you at this time, but Almyty God have you in His kepyng.
Wretyn at Castyr Hawill, the xxj. daye of Janever, in the furst yere of
Kyng Harry the vij^{th}.

  Be your servaunt,

  MARGERY PASTON.

I prey God no ladyis no more ovyr com you, that ye geve no lenggar
respyt in your materys.

    [Footnote 90-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


1008

ALICE, LADY FITZHUGH, TO JOHN PASTON[91-1]

_To my right trusty and welbeloved son,[91-2] Sir John Paston, be this
delyvered._

[Sidenote: FEB. 24]

Jon Paston, I recommaunde me to you in my moste hertely maner. And wher
I understande be my doghter Lovell, ye desyre to know whedir I woll have
the bargane ye made for me in Norwich or nay, and if I wol, I moste
content therfor now in mercs; Son, in good faith it is so, I shal
receyve no mony of the revenowse of my lyvelod afore Mydsommer; and also
I have payd accordyng to my promise to Sir William Cabell a great
payment, the which ye knowe wel was due to be payde, so that I can not
be of power to content therfore, for the which I am right sory, for I
know well I shall never have such a bargane.

Also my doghtyr Lovell[92-1] makith great sute and labour for my sone
hir husbande. Sir Edwarde Franke hath bene in the North to inquire for
hym; he is comyn agayne, and cane nogth understonde wher he is. Wherfore
her benevolers willith hir to continue hir sute and labour; and so I can
not departe nor leve hir as ye know well; and if I might be there,
I wold be full glad, as knowith our Lorde God, Whoo have you in His
blissid kepynge.

From London, the xxiiij^th day of February.

  Your loving moder,

  ALISE, LADY FITZHUGH.

    [Footnote 91-1: [From Fenn, ii. 336.] There is a difficulty in
    dating this letter only from the address being to Sir John Paston.
    It has every appearance of having been written in the year 1486,
    when Francis, Viscount Lovel, lay concealed shortly before his
    outbreak with Humphrey and Thomas Stafford. But in that case the
    prefix ‘Sir’ before John Paston’s name must not be taken as
    indicating that he was then a knight; for he was not knighted till
    the battle of Stoke in June 1487.

    The writer of this letter was the widow of Henry, Lord Fitzhugh,
    who died on the 12th June 1472. She was the daughter of Richard
    Nevill, Earl of Salisbury, and sister of Warwick the Kingmaker.]

    [Footnote 91-2: I find no evidence of any real relationship
    between Paston and Lady Fitzhugh.]

    [Footnote 92-1: Francis, Viscount Lovel, married Anne, daughter of
    Alice, Lady Fitzhugh.]


1009

MARGARET, COUNTESS OF OXFORD, TO JOHN PASTON[92-2]

_To my right trusti and welbiloved John Paston, Shrieve of Norffolk and
Suffolk._

[Sidenote: 1486 / MAY 19]

Right trusti and welbiloved, I recomaund me unto you. And for as moche
as I am credebly enfourmed that Fraunceis, late Lorde Lovell, is now of
late resorted into the Yle of Ely, to the entente by alle lykelyhod, to
finde the waies and meanes to gete him shipping and passage in your
costes, or ellis to resorte ageyn to seintuary, if he can or maie;

I therfor hertily desire praie you, and neverthelesse, in the Kinges
name, streitly chargie you that ye in all goodly haste endevore your
self that suche wetche or other meanes be used and hadde in the poorts,
and creks, and othre places wher ye thinke necessary by your discrecion,
to the letting of his seid purpose; and that ye also use all the waies
ye can or maie by your wisdom, to the taking of the same late Lorde
Lovell. And what pleasur ye maie do to the Kings Grace in this matier,
I am sure, is not to you unknowen. And God kepe you.

Wretyn at Lavenham, the xix. day of May.

  MARGARET OXYNFORD.[93-1]

    [Footnote 92-2: [From Fenn, ii. 338.] The date of this is quite
    certain from the subject to which it refers, as well as from the
    fact of John Paston being at the time Sheriff of Norfolk and
    Suffolk. Francis, Viscount Lovel, was one of the principal
    adherents of Richard III., and was attainted after the accession
    of Henry VII. in 1485. For some time he lay concealed, but in the
    spring of 1486 he attempted to raise an insurrection along with
    Humphrey and Thomas Stafford, who had broken out of their
    sanctuary at Colchester. He is said to have been drowned in the
    Trent in 1487, in endeavouring to escape after the battle of
    Stoke. But according to another story he lived in concealment for
    some time after.]

    [Footnote 93-1: Margaret, daughter of Richard Neville, Earl of
    Salisbury, and sister of Richard, the great Earl of Warwick, was
    the first wife of John de Vere, Earl of Oxford.--F.]


1010

HENRY VII. TO JOHN PASTON[93-2]

_To our trusty and welbeloved John Paston, one of our Esquiers for our
Body, Shreife of our countys of Norffolk and Suffolk._

BY THE KING.

[Sidenote: 1486 / AUG. 12]

Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. And whereas we send at this
time our trusty and welbeloved clerke and counseilor, Mr. Edmunde
Chaderton, to do and execute certein things by our commandement in those
parties, like as he can shew to you more at large; We desire and pray
you that ye not only yeve unto him therein credence, but also, for the
effectuall and speedy performance of the same, ye will be unto him from
time to time in everythinge, as the case shall require, adviseinge,
aidinge, and assistinge, as we singularly trust you, and as ye desire to
do us pleasure.

Yeven under our Signet at our manner of Shene, the xij^th day of August.

    [Footnote 93-2: [From Sandford’s Genealogy of the Paston Family.]
    This letter is derived from Mr. Worship’s article in the _Norfolk
    Archæology_ on a MS. Genealogy of the Paston family. The date must
    be 1486, during John Paston’s shrievalty. The transcript is of the
    seventeenth century.]


1011

JOHN, LORD FITZWALTER, TO JOHN PASTON[94-1]

_To my right wurshipfull cosyn, John Paston, esquyer._

[Sidenote: 1486 / SEPT. 19]

Right wurshipfull cosyn, I recomaunde me to you, certifyeng you that,
where as I understond ye have distreyned Richard Caus of Byngham[94-2]
for issuez ronne uppon hym in th’escheker to the summe of iiij_li._ and
odde sylver, I pray you that ye wull, the rather for my sake, showe hym
the favour that ye may doo, savyng youre sylfe, and that ye wulle not be
harde uppon hym; but if ye kan by th’advys of councell this next terme
fynde the meanes for youre discharge uppon youre acompte in th’escheker,
that than ye wull lete hym be so in reste and peas withoute more
paymentz for that cause; the which I prey you to tendre the rather
because I fynde the seid Richard Caus at all tymez my trewe servaunt,
and I shall be as redy to the acomplyshment of all youre resonable
desirez with Goddis grace, Who kepe you. At Attelburgh, this Tuesday
next before Seint Mathuz Day.

  Zowr Cosyn and frend,

  J. SIEUR FYTZWAUTER.

    [Footnote 94-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 176.] This letter is probably
    of the year 1486, when John Paston was sheriff. Its contents, as
    will be seen, are somewhat similar in character to those of No.
    1024, written a year or two later, after John Paston had been
    knighted.]

    [Footnote 94-2: Binham in Norfolk.]

  [[I fynde the seid Richard Caus
  _text reads “Cans”_]]


1012

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO JOHN PASTON[95-1]

_To my right trusty and right welbelovyd Councellor, John Paston,
Esquier._

[Sidenote: 1487 / JAN. 24]

John Paston, I comaund me to you. And as for such tithynge as ye have
sent hider, the Kyng had knowlech therof more than a sevyn-nyght passed.
And as for such names as ye have sent, supposyng theym to be gone with
the Lord Lovell, they be yitt in England, for he is departyng with
xiiij. personys and no moe. At the Kynges comyng to London I wold advise
you to see his Highnes. And Almyghty God kepe you.

Writen at Wyndesore, the xxiiij^th day of January.

  OXYNFORD.

  _Endorsed_: The Countis of Oxfordes lettre.

    [Footnote 95-1: [From Douce MS. 393, f. 78.] Francis, Viscount
    Lovel, after trying to raise a rebellion in England in 1486,
    escaped abroad to Flanders, and joined the Earl of Lincoln in the
    following spring in an invasion of England in behalf of Lambert
    Simnel. This letter appears therefore to have been written in the
    beginning of the year 1487.]


1013

JOHN, PRIOR OF NORWICH, TO ----[95-2]

[Sidenote: 1487]

Right worchupfull serys, we recomaunde us all unto you in oure most
herty wyse. And it is so that longe and many yerys ther hath ben hangyng
a grete variaunce and a growge bitwix Annes Paston deceassed, late the
wyff of William Paston, Justice, and William Paston now lyvyng, and
Clement Paston deceassid, ther sones, one the oone parte, and John
Paston, the sone of the seide William Paston, Justice, and of the seide
Annes his wiff, also deceassid, and Ser John Paston, Knyght, deceassed,
and John Paston yet lyvyng, sones to the seide John deceassid, on the
othir parte. And now the seide variaunce contynueth betwixe the seide
William and John that now is lyvyng of and upon the right, title, and
possessioun of the maners of Sporle, Woodhall, Pagrave, Cressyngham,
Swaynesthorpe, and Est Bekham, all [in] this cuntre of Norffolk.

Likith it you to wete that the seide William Paston, Justice, in his
lyve was a speciall lover and frende to our monastery, and for synguler
love and trust that he hadde to be remembred amonge us after hys
deceasse, not with stondyng h[e de]yed at London, yet he bequest his
body to be beryed, and is beryed in the chapell of Our Lady with inne
oure monastery. [And] the seide William Paston, Justice, oftyn and many
tymes in his pleyn lyfe, the seide Annes beyng present, he shewed unto
the Priour of our monastery that was than, called Dawn John
Heverlonde,[96-1] and to Dawn John Molett,[96-2] that was Priour after,
to Dawn John Fornsett, Doctour of Devynyte, Dawn Richerd Walsham, our
sexten, and to Dawn John Wechyngham, and to many dyverse other that were
of his acqueyntaunce, and that he had trust unto to breke his mynde for
the wele of his soule, that were thanne olde fadirs of our monastery,
and arn now decessed, that it was his verry last will that ought of the
seide maners schuld be perpetually immortaysed a serteyn londe, or
annuyte of suche valewe, that every suche monke that syngith the last
messe in the seide chapell, wher the body of the seide William Paston
light beryed, schuld have that day that he songe messe ther iiij_d._ to
pray for the soules of the seide William, and of Annes his wif, and for
ther auncetrys, kynred, consanguynyte, affynyte, and frendes, and for
all Cristen soules; and over that, a serteyn summe of money yerly to be
payed to have the obytt of the seide William and Annes zerly kept with
_dirige_ and masse in the seide chapell.

And it is so that many yeres aftir the decesse of the seide William,
Justice, ther were many men lyvyng bothe of olde brethern of oures afore
rehersyd, and of other that cowde aborne witnesse in this mater, and
that knewe the mynde of the seide William Paston, Justice, that it was
his last will, of whiche men many now be deceassed; and no merveill, for
it is upon a xliij. yere past sithen the seide William, Justice, deyed.
And also the seide Annes that was hys wif lyved more thanne xxx. wynter
aftir hir husbonde, and was in singuler trust with her husbonde, and one
of his executours, and wele knowen in this cuntre, a woman of vertuos
lyvyng and disposicion, and of goode discrecioun and conscience, and
knewe hir husbondes mynde and last will as wele as ony lyvyng creature;
she witnessed alway that it was hire husbondes last will to have this
perpetuall messe, and called on it all the dayes of hir lyfe, and also
atte her decesse; and sche seide that [it] was the will of her husbonde
that the annuyte schulde go oute of the seide maner of Swaynesthorpe.
The seide John Paston decessed wolde have hadde it graunted owte of the
seide maner of Cressyngham; and summe of the executours wolde have hadde
the seide messe to a contynued but for the terme of iiij^xx. yere, and
wolde have made writyng accordyng; but the seide Annes wolde not ther
of, but seide alway that it was the last will of hir husbonde to have
the messe made perpetuall, and the executours schewid to us that they
wolde se the wyll perfourmed; and ther upon the executours, be ther
comon assent, lefte a cofre with a grete substaunce of money of the
goodes of the seide William, Justice, to be kepte with inne our
monastery, and tolde and schewed to us that the seide gode schuld never
be departid nor hadde oute of our place till we wer made sure of the
seide annuyte. And duryng all that season that the seide cofer with the
goodes was with ynne our monastery, it was alway schewid to us that the
seide annuyte schulde be mortaysed in perpetuyte, and duryng all that
season that the seid cofer was in our place, we hadde money yerly yoven
us to pray for his soule to kepe [his obytt][97-1]; and be menys devysed
with oute the knowleche of the seide Annes, or of ony of our brethern,
all the goode that was in the seide cofre was conveyed oute of our
monastery, and after that dede done, ther was no more money yoven us,
nowther to kepe the seide obit, ner to pray for the soull of the seide
William, as be the seide executours, savyng that the seide Annes, duryng
her lyve, yaff us of hir owne cost yerly to remembre the soule, and that
that hath be done sythen, hath be don of our owne devocion, and this
many zerys ther hath no thing be yoven us, notwithstondyng of our own
devocion we have rehersid his name in oure bede rolle every Sonday.

And now it is informed us that as wele the seide William as the seide
John hath putt all ther title and interest, as wele in and of all the
seide maners, londes, and tenementys as of the seide goodes in the
awarde and jugement of the Right Reverend Fader in God, my Lord of
Ely,[98-1] Chaunceler of Inglond, Ser Reynold Bray, Knyght, and in you
tweyne. And in asmoche as ze be of our cuntre and speciall frendes to
our monastery, and longest acqueyntyd with you, that makith me and all
my brethren the more bolde to schewe this our mater and interest unto
you, beseching yow bothe to tendre the mater, and to schewe it bothe to
my Lorde of Ely and to Ser Reynolde Bray, that atte suche tyme as ze
have the examynacion of the title of theise seide maners, that ze will
vouche saff of your charite to schewe this mater and our interest in
this behalf, and of the seide annuyte, and how that we aught of right to
have a graunt of it oute of the seide maners.

And in this mater we hertily pray yow to take remembraunce and speciall
labour, so that we may trust that it schall not askape your handes, nowe
that the mater is putte in yowe; and all our monastery schall pray for
you, and also rewarde you to your plesur, and over that, ze schall do
her in suche a goode dede that God schall rewarde you.

Wretyn in our monastery, the ----[98-2] day of ----,[98-2] the secunde
yer of the regne of Kyng Herry the vij^th.

  By JOHN, Prior off Northwich
  and the Covent.

    [Footnote 95-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The writer of this letter
    was John Bonwell, who was made Prior of Norwich in 1480, and died
    in 1488. As it is actually dated in the second year of Henry VII.,
    it must have been written either after the 22nd August in 1486 or
    before that date in 1487. Most probably it is of the latter year.
    It is endorsed in a contemporaneous hand--‘Billa Prioris Norwic’
    pro missa perpetue fundanda.’ One or two words are now lost by the
    decay of the paper, which seem to have been visible in the text
    when Fenn copied the MS. for his fifth volume.]

    [Footnote 96-1: John Haverland was Prior of Norwich from 1436 to
    1453.]

    [Footnote 96-2: Prior from 1453 to 1471.]

    [Footnote 97-1: The writing is here blurred and indistinct, being
    written on an erasure.]

    [Footnote 98-1: John Alcock.]

    [Footnote 98-2: Blanks in MS.]


1014

SIR EDMUND BEDINGFIELD TO JOHN PASTON[99-1]

_Un to my ryght wurshypfull cosyn, John Paston, Esquyer, for the Body._

[Sidenote: 1487 / MAY 16]

Ryght wurshypfull cosyn, I recomawnd me un to you as hertly as I can,
letyng you wytte I was with my Lorde Stuarde[99-2] as on Munday laste
paste, by the desyir of them that I myght not sey ney to. I herde all
that was seyd there, but they gaate non avawntage, wurde, nor promyse
off me; but they thought in asmoche as they ware the beste in the shere,
that every man owghte to wayte and go with them. Wherto yt was answerd
that oure master,[99-3] nexte the Kynge, havynge hys commysshon, muste
nedys have the jentylmen and the contre to a wayte up on hym by the
vertu of the same; but yt was thought I owght not to obeye no copy of
the commisshon, withoute I had the same under wexe, where in hathe ben
gret argument, whyche I understoode by reporte a fortnyte paste, and
that causyd me to sende unto my lorde to have the very commysshon,
whyche he sente me, and a letter, where off I sende you the copy here in
closyd.

As for you, ye be sore takyn in sum place, seying that ye intende swyche
thynges as ys lyke to folow gret myscheffe. I seyd I undyrstood non
swyche, nor thynges lyke it; and yt ys thoughte ye intende nat to go
forthe thys jorneye, nor no jentylman in that quarter but Robert Brandon
that hath promysyd to go with them, as they seye.

I understonde Sir Wylliam Bolen[99-4] and Sir Harry Heydon[99-5] ware at
Thetforde in to Kente ward, but they returnyd in to Norffolk a geyne;
I thynke they wull not goo thys jorney, yff the Kynge nede. Ser Harry
was at Attylborow on Saterday. I wene he had a vyce there to turne a
zen; wher for, cosyn, yt ys good to understonde the sertente what
jentylmen intende to goo, and be assuryd to go together, that I may have
wurde; my cosyn Hoptun hathe promysyd that he wull be oon. As fore
Wysman, he seythe he wull be off the same, but I can have no holde.

Furthermore, cosyn, yt ys seyd that after my lordys departyng to the
Kynge ye ware mette at Barkwey, whyche ys construid that ye had ben with
the Lady Lovell, but wrathe seyd never well; and in asmoche as we
understonde my lordys plesur, yt ys well doon we dele wysly therafter.
And, nexte to the Kynge, I answerd pleynly I was bownde to do him
service, and to fullfylle hys comaundment to the uttermest off my
powere, by the grace off God, Who ever preserve you to Hys plesur.

Wretyn at Oxburgh, the xvj. day of Maye.

  Your cosyn,

  E. BEDYNGFELD.[100-1]

    [Footnote 99-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter and that
    which follows were written during the period of Lambert Simnel’s
    rebellion. The rebels were at this time in Ireland, but they soon
    after invaded England, and were defeated at the battle of Stoke on
    the 16th June 1487. Francis, Viscount Lovel, took part in the
    movement, and is supposed to have perished in the battle, or
    shortly after it.]

    [Footnote 99-2: John Ratcliff, Lord Fitzwalter.--_See_ Campbell’s
    _Materials for a History of Henry VII._, i. 92, 241.]

    [Footnote 99-3: Probably the Earl of Oxford.--_See_ next letter.]

    [Footnote 99-4: Sir William Boleyn, of Blickling, had been made a
    Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of Richard III. He died in
    1505.--F.]

    [Footnote 99-5: Sir Henry Heydon, of Baconsthorp, Knight, had been
    steward of the household to Cecilia, Duchess of York, and died in
    1503.--F.]

    [Footnote 100-1: Sir Edmund Bedingfeld was made a Knight of the
    Bath at the Coronation of Richard III. He was likewise in high
    favour with Henry VII., who paid him a royal visit at Oxburgh, in
    Norfolk. He died in 1496.--F.]


1015

[THE EARL OF OXFORD?] TO SIR EDMUND BEDINGFIELD[100-2]

[Sidenote: 1487 / MAY (?)]

Where as I understonde by your late wrytyng un to me, that ye have ryght
well endevyrd you to th’execusion of the Kynges comission and
comawndment, in preparyng your selffe with the jentylmen and other of
the contre, to be redy to do the Kyng servyce, whyche I have shewid un
to the Kynges Hyghnes, so that hys Grace ys ryght well content and ryght
thankfully acceptyth the same, understondynge the ryght good myndys and
dysposyschon off you and off other jentylmen there towardes hys Grace.
How be yt, hys Hyghnes wull not as zytte put you to ony further labur or
charge, for somoche as hys rebellys and enemyes be in to Irlande;
neverthelesse hys Grace wull that the contre be redy at all tymis to do
hys Hyghnes servyce up on resonabull warnyng; for so moche as the Kynges
Grace intendythe to make provysyon to sende an armi in to Irlonde in
haaste, nat knowyng as zytte whether that ye, and other aboute you shall
be desyird to bere ony charge there to or no. And where as yt ys
mervellyd that ye had not the Kynges comysshon, under hys gret seall,
I send yt to you with thys my wrytyng, wyllynge you nat to precede
further to eny execushon theroff tyll swyche tyme as ye have other wise
in comawndment, alwey thankyng hertyly the jentylmen, and all other for
ther good wyllys towardes me.

    [Footnote 100-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The MS. from which this
    letter was printed was evidently the copy of a letter, which was
    enclosed in the preceding. Fenn supposes with great probability
    that the writer was the Earl of Oxford, but the MS. being only a
    copy, there is no signature attached. Commissions of array were
    issued on the 7th April 1487 for the counties of Suffolk, Norfolk,
    and Essex, with special instructions for repairing and guarding
    the beacons for fear of an invasion. The Commissioners for the
    County of Norfolk were John, Duke of Suffolk, John, Earl of
    Oxford, John Radcliff, Lord Fitzwalter, and fifteen others, among
    whom was John Paston.--See _Patent Roll_, 2 Hen. VII., p. 2, m. 6,
    _in dorso_.]


1016

KNIGHTS MADE AT THE BATTLE OF STOKE[101-1]

[Sidenote: 1487 / JUNE 16]

  Sir Edmond Benyngfeld.
  Sir Jamys Blount.
  Sir Richard Croft.
  Sir [Humfrey] Stanley.
  [Sir Richard De]levere.
  Sir J[ohn] Mortumer.
  Sir William Troutbeke.

_Knyghtes made at the same Batayll._

  The sone and heyr of the Lord Audeley.[102-1]
  Sir Edward Noreys.
  Sir Robert Clyfford.
  Sir George Hopton.
  Sir John Paston.
  Sir Thomas Lovell.
  Sir Humfrey Savage.
  Sir Herry Willoughby.
  Sir John Sapcotes.
  Sir William Vampage.
  Sir Antony Brone.
    .  .  .  .
    .  .  .  .
    .  .  .  .
    .  .  .  .
    .  .  .  .
  Sir Gregory . . . .
  Sir Thomas Bl[ount].
  Sir Robert Cheyny.
  Sir William Car[ew].
  Sir John Wy[ndham].
  Sir Simond . . . .
  Sir Roger Be[llingham].
  Sir John . . . . .
  Sir George Nevil . .
  Sir Robert Radcly[ff].
  Sir Jamys Par[ker].
  Sir Edward Dar[ell].
  Sir Edward Pekeryn[g].
  Sir Thomas of W[olton].
  Sir William Sand[es].

  A mutilated endorsement in Sir John Paston’s hand reads, ‘. . . . .
  prisoners . . . . . fownd.’

    [Footnote 101-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 135.] This is only a
    fragment, the first part of which is lost. The seven names at the
    beginning are the end of a list of knights bannerets made upon the
    field. Then follow the names of those who were merely dubbed
    knights; but this list, too, is imperfect, not merely by the
    mutilation of some names, but because another leaf would certainly
    have been required to give them all. Compare another copy of these
    lists in Leland’s _Collectanea_, iv. 214-15, where the names in
    the second list stand in a different order. Several of the
    mutilated names here have been filled in from Leland; but,
    curiously enough, that list gives no Sir Gregory and no Sir Simon.
    Since this was in type the Editor has found a complete list, more
    accurate than Leland’s, which will be printed at the end of these
    letters.]

    [Footnote 102-1: Sir James Audeley, as his name is given in
    Leland’s list. This was Sir James Touchet, who succeeded his
    father as Lord Audeley in 1491, and was beheaded and attainted in
    1497.]


1017

DAME ELIZABETH BREWS TO SIR JOHN PASTON[102-2]

_To my rytth worchupfull son, Sir Jon Paston, be thys byll delyvyrd in
hast._

[Sidenote: 1487, or later]

Ryth worchupfull son, I recommend me on to zow and to my lady zowyr wyf,
and thankyng zow harttyly for the grett labyr thatt ze had on Thorys day
for me, and for zowyr kyndnes; for and odyr had don asse ze ded, I had
had my purpos; qwerfor I prey God do be them asse they do be me.

Son, I must prey zow to have a dosseyn men in harnes, with bowys and
wepyn convenyent for them, that I may feche my stres ageyn. The schrevys
man wasse here wythe me, and [j. of] yowyres, he seyth he ys, and he
hatth mad me feythful promes that he wol be wyth me ageyn on Monday,
qwerfor I prey zow harttyly, son, and reqwere zow that zowyr men may be
wyth me on Monday, as my werry tros ys in zow, qwo sknowyth blyssyd
Jesu, Hom haff zow and zowyr in Yss keppyng.

  Be zowyr trew modyr,

  DAM ELYSABETHE BREWYSSE.

    [Footnote 102-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Fenn dates this letter
    ‘about 1487.’ It cannot be earlier than June of that year, and may
    be a few years later. But the date is unimportant. This letter
    appears to be a holograph. The next is written by a scribe.]


1018

DAME ELIZABETH BREWS TO SIR JOHN PASTON[103-1]

_To my right worshipfull son, Sir John Paston, Knyght, be this
delyverd._

[Sidenote: 1488(?)]

Right worshipfull son, I recommaund me unto you and to my lady my
doughter your wyfe, and I send you both Cristes blyssyng and myne. And,
son, I thank you hertely for my son, William Brews; and I moste pray you
for the reverens of Jesu to help hym for your tenauntes and myne, or els
John Dynne will owver rewle them. And, son, God thank you, ye helpyd ons
Whyte of Metfeld, and so I must beseche you nowe to do, and that it wold
pleas you to gyffe credans unto the Priour of the Wyhte Freres, for I
have shewed unto hym my mynd; and as ye do, I hold me content.

And, son, we ladys and jentil women in this contrey that is wedows, be
sore trobyld with the Bysshop of Chester,[104-1] and haskith of us more
than we may pay, and that knowith All myghty Jesu, Who have you in His
blyssed kepyng.

  Be your moder,

  DAME ELIZABETH BREWS.

    [Footnote 103-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is nearly as indefinite as that of the last, but it certainly lies
    between the year 1487, when Sir John Paston was knighted, and
    1489, when William Brews died. If the latter part of the letter
    refers to the levying of a subsidy, in which the Bishop of Chester
    may have been one of the King’s agents, the date is probably about
    the end of the year 1488. Sir Thomas Brews, the writer’s husband,
    died in 1482.]

    [Footnote 104-1: The Bishops of Coventry and Lichfield were often
    called Bishops of Chester before the foundation of the modern
    Bishopric of Chester by Henry VIII. John Hales or Halse was Bishop
    of Coventry from 1459 to 1490.]


1019

SIR JOHN PASTON TO DAME MARGERY PASTON[104-2]

_To Dame Margery Paston, at Oxenhed._

[Sidenote: 1486-95]

Mastress Margerey, I recomand me to yow. And I prey yow in all hast
possybyll to send me, by the next swer messenger that ye can gete, a
large playster of your _flose ungwentorum_ for Kynges Attorney, Jamys
Hobart, for all hys dysease is but an ache in hys knee. He is the man
that brought yow and me togedyrs, and I had lever then xl_li._ ye koud
with your playster depart hym and hys peyne. But when ye send me the
playster, ye must send me wryghtyng hough it shold be leyd to and takyn
fro hys knee, and hough longe it shold abyd on hys kne unremevyd, and
hough longe the playster wyll laste good, and whethyr he must lape eny
more clothys aboute the playster to kepe it warme or nought. And God be
with yow.

  Your,

  JOHN PASTON.

    [Footnote 104-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] James Hobart was the
    King’s Attorney-General from 1486 to 1509, and Dame Margery Paston
    died in 1495. There is nothing to fix the date of this letter more
    precisely.]


1020

THE QUEEN TO THE EARL OF OXFORD[105-1]

_To oure right trusty and enterly beloved cosyn, Th’Erll of Oxon._

BY THE QUENE.

[Sidenote: 1487-1502]

Ryght trusty and entierly beloved cosyn, we grete you well, lattyng you
wete hou it is commen un to oure knowlege that where as ze newly entred
upon oure welbeloved Symon Blyant, gentilman, in to the maner of Hemnals
in Cotton, descended and belongyng unto hym by right of enheritaunce, as
it is seid, ze ther upon desired the same Symon to be agreable for hys
part to put all maters of variance thenne dependyng atwene hym and oon
Sir John Paston, Knyght, pretendyng a title unto the seid maner into
th’award and jugement of two lenerd men, by you named and chosen as
arbritrours atwene them; and in case that the same arbritrours of and
upon the premisses neither yave oute nor made suche awarde be for the
brekyng up of Pasche [_Easter_] terme nowe last passed, ze of your owne
offre graunted and promysid unto the seid Symon, as we be enformed, to
restore hym forwyth there upon unto hys possession of the seid maner.
And how it be that the same Symon, at youre mocion and for the pleasir
of youre lordshyp, as he seith, aggreed un to the seid compromyse, and
ther upon brought and shewed hys evydence concernyng, and sufficiently
provyng hys ryght in the seid maner un to the seid arbritrours, and that
they have not made nor yolden out betwene the said parties any suche
awarde; yet have not ze restored the same Symon unto hys possession of
the seid maner, but contynuelly kepe hym owt of the same, wich, yf it so
be, is not only to hys right grete hurt and hinderaunce, but also oure
mervaile. Wherfore we desire and pray you ryght affectueusly that ze
woll the rather at the contemplacion of thees oure lettres, shew unto
the said Symon, in hys rightfull interesse and title in the seid maner
all the favorable lordshyp that ze goodely may, doyng hym to be restored
and put in to hys lawfull and peasible possession of the same, as fer as
reason, equite, and good conscience shall require, and youre seid
promise, in suche wyse that he may undyrstond hym selfe herynne to fare
the better for oure sake, as oure verray trust is in you.

Yeven under oure signet at my Lordes Palois of Westmynstre, the xxv. day
of Juyn.

  [ELEZEBETH.][106-1]

  Subskrybyd with the Quenys hand.

    [Footnote 105-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter and that
    which follows, relating to the manor of Cotton, are both quite
    uncertain in point of date, except that they cannot be earlier
    than 1487, when Sir John Paston was knighted, nor later than 1502,
    as the Queen and Sir John Paston himself both died in the year
    following.]

    [Footnote 106-1: This name is written in a different character,
    intended as a representation of the Queen’s signature which it
    somewhat resembles. The writing, however, is crossed out. It is
    probably the work of the same pen that wrote the words below,
    though these are in a smaller hand.]


1021

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[106-2]

_To our hertly welbilovyd John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1487-1502]

Right hertly welbilovyd, I grete you wele. And where Sir John Howard,
Knyght, Sir Gilberde Debenham, Knyght, gederith grete feloship of men,
purposyng on Monday next comyng to take stresses of the Lady Roos; and I
deme that they undre the colour of the same entende to set on Coton, and
to gete it if they may; I therfor councelle you to sende downe a
certeine of your men or elles come your silfe for the save garde of the
said Coton. Also that ye yeve credence un to the brynger herof. And our
Lorde kepe you.

Writyn at the lodge in Lavenham the last day of Juylle.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 106-2: [From Douce MS. 393, f. 84.] _See_ preliminary
    note to the last letter.]


1022

JOHN DAUBENEY TO [SIR JOHN PASTON][107-1]

[Sidenote: [1487-1502] / AUG.]

Please your masterchep to have knowlage that my Lord Archebyschop of
Yorke[107-2] is in god helle, blyssyd be God. And I came to hym as on
Monday last past, and toke hym your letter. And whan I had takyn hym and
he had over sey it, he merveylle sor of hyr dysposicion, a bad me not
care, ye shuld do welle i nowe. And than he told me that he had spokyn
to Master William Paston for a note of a letter, hewghe it is best to
write to hyr. And so on Tewysday Master William and I, and Skerne of my
Lord of Oxenfordis hows, and mad (_sic_) toke hym on Wednysday o [_i.e._
one] not of a letter the wyche I send you; and whan he sey it he thowght
it to long, and mad one after his ownne entent, the wiche I send yow a
copy of. Also I send yow a copy of the letter that the quene sent to my
Lord of Oxenford for the maner of Cotton for Blyaunt; but my Lord of
Yorke told to Skerne that he wold in any wysse that my Lord of Oxenford
shuld help yow to kepe possession. And so Skerne purposythe to be with
in thys v. deyes at home, for to enforme my Lord of Oxenford of my Lord
of Yorke is entent, and that he se in no wysse that no man do yow no
wrong as moche as my Lord of Oxenford powyr may help yow; for Skerne
came from my Lord of Oxenford to my Lord of Yorke for the same mater,
for that my Lord of Yorke shuld informe the quene of the mater, and be
cause the quene hathe take hyr chambre my Lord of Yorke toke Skerne a
rynge for a tokyn to my Lord Tresorer[107-3] that he shuld excuse my
Lord of Oxenford to the quene, for as moche as ye hathe (_sic_) infeffid
my Lord of Oxenford in a trost in the maner of Cotton he may no lesse
doo but helpe yow. Item, thys day is the massenger gone to my Lady of
Suffolk with my Lordis letter. I shall have a answer at the morn on
Monday, I trost to God, ryght god, &c., it cowd non ere be sped. My Lord
hath be all this weke at the Cowncell at Chelchyche and j. day at
Chenne.[108-1] Item, I send yow iij. writtis for feleneys and trespace
and ij. for Mariete mater. Also your flowyr; Also a letter of Cablys;
Also a write for Playter, a letter to Mestres Clere. Item, my Lord wylle
in any wyse that ye kepe welle all the lyvelod that ye have of Sir John
Fastolff, and that ye suffyr no man to entre no lond nor place, lord nor
other personys, what sum ever they be. Ye may veryly thynke he ys your
speciall god lord, and that ye shall knowe in tyme comyng. I understand
that Calle dothe passyngly welle in your maters in the spirituall lawe,
as his letter makyth mencion, &c. Wretyn at London the Satyrday before
Seynt Lawrens day.

  Your servaunt,

  JOHN DAUBENEY.

    [Footnote 107-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 48.] The letter here
    referred to from the Queen to the Earl of Oxford seems undoubtedly
    to be No. 1020; and the date must accordingly be between 1487 and
    1502. The reference to the Queen’s confinement does not help us to
    much greater precision, for the time of year does not agree with
    any known occasion. But some years are distinctly excluded, and
    the only possible ones are 1487, 1488, 1490, or from 1493 to 1497
    inclusive, or 1500, or 1501.]

    [Footnote 107-2: Archbishop Rotherham.]

    [Footnote 107-3: John, Lord Dynham.]

    [Footnote 108-1: Sheen.]


1023

ABSTRACT[108-2]

R[OBERT] CLERE TO SIR JOHN PASTON, KNIGHT

[Sidenote: Not before 1487]

Your farmer of Mauteby has not given surety and paid poundage for his
cattle, as he pretends. I hope you will not encourage him, when he tells
you he owes me no duty, and that he took not my ‘merch’ for twenty
years, but only so long as he continued in Heryngby farm. I denied him
the replevin, because the ground of my farm is parcel of ancient
demesne. Your tenants complain of me without cause. I hope you will not
be displeased if I ask them simply for what is due to me. I never said
‘that ye shuld hang upon many bushes.’ I have always been glad to say or
do my best for you, as any poor gentleman in Norfolk. I pray you bring
forth my accuser that I may come to my answer, and know who would make
variance between us.

Ormesby, 24 Oct.

  [The writer of this letter was Robert Clere of Ormesby, who was
  knighted in 1494, and was sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1501.
  The expression ‘your’ farmer of Mauteby, shows that it was written
  after the death of Margaret Paston, and that the Sir John addressed
  must have been her second son, to whom the manor of Mauteby
  descended. The date is, therefore, not earlier than 1487 when this
  Sir John was knighted, and may be many years later.]

    [Footnote 108-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


1024

JOHN, LORD FITZWALTER, TO SIR JOHN PASTON[109-1]

_To my right worshipfull cosyn, Syr John Paston, Knight, be thys lettre
delivered._

[Sidenote: 1488(?) / APRIL 7]

Right worshipfull cosyn, in my most herty wise I [comme]nd me to you.
And where I am enformed that ye have takyn a disthresse within the
[Du]chy of Lankastir for suche money as was commyng toward you of ryght
for the tyme that ye were shiryef, me seme, cosyn, ye aught not to take
it within the said Duchy of noon auncyen demene holdyn upon the King;
for there be places inow to gadir it upon without the said auncyen
demene, and so ye cannot lose it. And also, cosyn, I am enformed that it
is paied alredy to oon John Burnam, which is of sufficyency inow. For
whiche cause mesemythe it werne resone to levey it upon hym than ther
where as is noon auctorite to levey it upon. Wherfore, cosyn, I pray you
to be good mastir for my sake to thies pore men, whiche be the Kingz
tenauntz, and to shew them the favour that ye may. And I shall be as
glad to doo you as gret plesure in tyme commyng, by Goddz grace, Who
preserve you.

Wretyn at Attylborow, the vij. daie of Apryll.

  Zowir cosyn and frend,

  [J.] SIR FYTZ WAUTER.

    [Footnote 109-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Sir John Paston had been
    sheriff in the year 1485-6, but he did not receive his knighthood
    till June 1487 at the battle of Stoke, so that this letter cannot
    be earlier than 1488. It is, however, not unlikely to have been
    written in that year, or one or two years later. The writer, Lord
    Fitzwalter, was beheaded and attainted in 1495 as an adherent of
    Perkin Warbeck.]


1025

LORD FITZWALTER TO SIR JOHN PASTON[110-1]

_To my right wourschippfull and hertely welbeloved cousyn, Sir John
Paston, Knyght, this be delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1488-94]

Right wourschippfull cousyn, in as hertely wyse as I cane, I recommaund
me to you. And forasmoche as ther was appoynted a day that ye and my
cousyn Heydon, Sir Robert Brandon, the Kynges Attorney, and other of the
worschippfull of this schyr, should have mett here before this tyme of
Estren, it was so longe or the Kynges Attorney was commen in to the
contre, and the tyme so shorte, that it hathe bene thowght there myght
be non convenable tyme affor this. Wherfor they be agreed that they and
ye should mete here on Thursday next commyng. Prayinge you, therfor,
that ye wolbe here at that tyme, trustynge to Godes mercy that a right
good wey shalbe hadde betyx yow that all grugges and rancores shalbe
layd a parte. And therfor, cousyn, I praye yow that ye wol not fayle for
to be here, and what I canne do for yow, ye shall fynde it redy with
Godes grace, Who have yow in His most blessed and assured kepyng.

Wreten on Good Fryday last passed.

  Zowir lofyng cosyn,

  J. SIR FITZ WAUTER.

    [Footnote 110-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter,
    as of the last, must be between the years 1488 and 1494.]


1026

WILLIAM PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[111-1]

_To Sir John Paston, be thys lettyr delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1488 / MAY 13]

Aftyr all dewe recomendacion, pleasyt yow to undyrstonde that my
lorde[111-2] hathe ben with the Kynge in Wyndesour at Seynt Georgys
Feste, and ther at the same feste were bothe the inbacetours of Breten
and of Flaundyrs, as well fro the Kynge of Romayns[111-3] as fro the
yonge Duke.[111-4] But I can not schew yow the certeyn whedyr we schall
have with them warre or pease; but I undyrstonde for certeyn that all
suche capeteyns as wente to the see in Lente, that is to sey, Sir
Charlys Somersett, Sir Richard Hawte, and Syr Wylliam Vampage, makythe
them redy to goo to the see ageyn as schortely as they can, to what
intente I can not sey.

Also, where as it was seyde that my Lord Woddevyle and other schulde
have gone over in to Breten, to have eyded the Duke of Breten,[111-5] I
can not tell of non suche eyd. Butt upon that seynge ther came many men
to Sowthehamton, where it was seyd that he schulde have takyn schyppyng,
to have waytyd upon hym over; and soo whan he was countyrmaundyd, thos
that resortyd thedyr, to have gone over with hym taryde there styll in
hope that they schuld have ben lycensyd to have gone over; and whan they
sey [_saw_] no lykeleod that they schuld have lycens, there was ij.C. of
them that gete them in to a Breten schyppe, the whyche was late come
over with salte, and bad the mayster sett them a lond in Breten. And
they had nott seylyd not paste vj. leges butt they aspied a Frencheman,
and the Frencheman mad over to them; and they ferde as thow they wolde
not have medylde with them, and all the Englysche men went undyr the
hetchys, soo that they schewyd no more but those that came to
Sowthehamton with the schype, to cawse the Frenchemen to be the more
gladder to medyll with them; and soo the Frencheman burdyd them, and
then they that were undyr the hetches came up, and soo toke the
Frencheman, and caryed the men, schyppe, and all in to Breaten.

Also, ther was ther an inbacetour fro the Kynge of Schottes,[112-1] who
is now put in grete trobyll be hys son and other of the lordes of hys
londe.

Syr, as I came homewerde be London, I spake there with Emonde Dormand,
and he seyd that he had wretyn onto yow, but he had none aunswere;
wherfor he prayd me that if I knew ony man comynge towerdes Norwhyche,
and I wold wrythe on to yow that he ferythe, if ye see none other
dyreccion, that he schall be comittyd to the Flete.

Also, he schewyd me that Herry Wyott wholde fynde the mene to have yow
condemnyd, and recover the obligacion of xl_li_. ageyns yow, and soo he
seythe he whote nott how to doo, for he is halfe dysmayd; he ferythe
lesse that he schall never come home. But he intendythe to plede the
obligacion fulfylyd at Norwyche, for he seythe ther is non other remedy
to save yow fro the condemnacion, tyl that he herythe otherwyse from
yow, whyche he thynketh longe aftyr.

Wretyn at Henyngham, the xiij^te day of May, with the hand of your
brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 111-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] There can be no doubt
    this letter was written in the year 1488, after Sir Edward
    Woodville (called Lord Woodville) had gone over to aid the Duke of
    Brittany against the French, and at the beginning of the rebellion
    of the young Prince of Scotland (afterwards James IV.) against his
    father, James III., who was defeated in battle, and afterwards
    murdered in June of that year.]

    [Footnote 111-2: The Earl of Oxford.]

    [Footnote 111-3: Maximilian, Archduke of Austria, was elected King
    of the Romans in 1486.]

    [Footnote 111-4: Philip, Duke of Burgundy, son of Maximilian.]

    [Footnote 111-5: Francis II., Duke of Brittany.]

    [Footnote 112-1: James III.--_See_ preliminary note.]


1027

THOMAS ANDREW TO WILLIAM PASTON[113-1]

_To the ryght . . . . . . . . William Paston Squyer . . . . . my Lord of
Ox[ford]._

[Sidenote: 1488(?) / DEC. 1 (?)]

Ryght worchipfull sir, in my best maner I recommend me unto you as he
that is and shalbe at your commandment. Sir, I beseche you to showe my
good lord and yours that a cordyng to his commandment I have sesed the
good of the parson of Testerton[113-2] and of Henry Fox, exsepe thos
goodis of the sayd Fox that whare formerly sesed be the servantis of my
Lord of Surrey; and, Sir, all thos goodis that I have sesed of them both
are nat worthe lytyll mony lytyll past xl_s._ or iij_li._ at the m[os]t,
exsepe the parsons corne; and if that may betakyn a way thane the
Chyrche may not be served, and that whar pety. I besech you that I may
knowe my Lordis plesur in that be halfe, for els I thynke the baly of
the franches will have all, for Testyrton is in the Dowchy. And so I am
leek to have lytyll or nowt for all my lawbour and costis withowt my
Lord be my good lord in that be halff be your mene.

Sir,[113-3] I pray you tell my Lord that the fryer of Lynne that . . .
ak . . . . . . . . cheff, for he served a cherche in Norfolk callyd
Hornyngtoft and ther . . . . . . rd a p . . . . s callyd Master Thomas
Mertyn, and as I wene he had felows privy to that robery (?) an[d ot]her
that be nat yet knowyn, and if he whare well a posed he wold tel[l], &c.

Also[113-4] Henry Fox and the parson of Testerton whar gretely (?)
acuequyentyd and conversand with one Sir William, a chanon of Hempton
Abbay, cause my Lord to inquere if he whar owt privy of the mony makyng
or eny other of that Abbay of Hempton. I know nothyng but that they whar
gret to gether, &c. Sir, I besech you, be good master to Fox wyff if ye
may; how be it he is nowght, but peraventure he may amend, but she is
ryght a good woman be my troughe, and it whar gret pety but she and her
chyld myght have somwat. And, my Lord, or ye send me eny letter ye may
send it me be John a More, this brynger, if he cum agayne, or els be Fox
wyff if her husband be not gone to London. And ever Jhesu preserve you
to your most gentyll hertis desyer. At Ryburgh this Monday next Sent
Andrew.

  Your servant,

  THOMAS ANDREW.

    [Footnote 113-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 139.] This letter is
    manifestly of the same year as No. 1028, which apparently was
    written about A.D. 1488-1490. Most probably the exact year is
    1488, when the ‘Monday next St. Andrew’ was the very day
    following, _i.e._ 1st December--unless it was 1494, when the same
    thing occurred.]

    [Footnote 113-2: Richard Fenwyk.]

    [Footnote 113-3: Opposite this and the next paragraph the word
    ‘No^ta’ occurs in the margin, in the same hand, apparently, as the
    text.]

    [Footnote 113-4: _See_ footnote 3 _supra_.]


1028

THOMAS ANDREW TO WILLIAM PASTON[114-1]

_To the ryght worchipfull mayster, William Paston, Squyer, with my Lord
of Oxynford, [be t]his bill delyverd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1488 / DEC. 16]

Ryght worchipfull sir, I recomaund me un to you in my best maner,
acordyng to my deute. Sir, I sent you a letter by Henre Fox wyff, and I
had non answer from you of it. On of the gretest thynges that I wrot to
you of, was that the fryer shuld be aposed, howo was prevy with hym,
whan he robbed Master Martyn, the prest, at Hornyngtoft in Norffolk;
also that Fox and the parson of Testerton,[114-2] shuld be aposed if eny
of Hempton Abbay whar out [_were aught_] prevy to the mony makyng.

Sir, now I beseche you to send me a copy of thes mony makers confeschon,
and ther namys, for I ame bothe sworne on the quest of the _oyer
determiner_, and also on the quest at large, and of that we most make
our verdyte at the sessyons after Crystmes for the quest at large; for
we toke day over at the last sessyons tyll the sessyons after Crestmes
for the quest at large. Lytefot, of your hows, is sworne on the _oyer
determiner_.

I beseche you to speke with my lord, to know of his good lordchepe how
we shall demene ourselff in that be half; and I beseche you send me word
as sone as ye can.

I thynk that Yelvertons servant, that is with you in preson, shall com a
gayne hether, and he may bryng your letter to me. He[115-1] bryngythe
you this letter, and if it may be nat a fendyng, I pray you be good
master to Yelverton for my sake. I have fownd hym a good persone.

Sir, I shall not be with my lady is grace[115-2] this Crystmes, far her
grace shalbe with the Kynges Grace after Crystmes; and thane I shall
awayt on her grace, wher ye shall have my servyce be the grace of Jesu,
He preserve you.

At Ryburgh, the xvj. day of December.

And ye hepe [_help_] nat, I am leke to losse moche mony of my costes for
thes mony makers. I pray helpe, &c.

  Your servant,

  THOMAS ANDREW.

    [Footnote 114-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Thomas Andrew, the
    writer of this letter, was a servant of William Paston, the uncle
    of Sir John, but the William Paston to whom this letter is
    addressed seems to have been Sir John’s brother, whom we find to
    have been in service with the Earl of Oxford during the years
    1488-90.]

    [Footnote 114-2: Richard Fenwyk was rector of Testerton from
    1482-1504.]

    [Footnote 115-1: Apparently this ‘he’ means Yelverton himself, his
    servant being at the time a prisoner in the Earl of Oxford’s
    custody. Fenn erroneously reads ‘in person’ instead of ‘in preson’
    in the previous sentence.]

    [Footnote 115-2: Fenn supposes ‘my lady’s grace’ to be the
    Countess of Richmond, the King’s mother. I should think, however,
    it was more probably the Lady Anne Beaufort, wife of William
    Paston the uncle, the writer being in their service.]


1029

T. GRIGGS TO SIR JOHN PASTON[115-3]

_To the Right Honorable Sir John Paston, Knyght, be this delyverid._

[Sidenote: 1489 / FEB. 2]

Right reverent and honorable, after the ordre of all diew recommendacion
had, I recomaunde me un to your maistership. Sir, it is so that John
Talyour of Brytcham, debite [_deputy_] in your office of Th’admirallite,
was with me this mornyng to have myn advyce in this mater folowyng, the
whiche is this.

There was taken ageyns Thornham, in the Kynges streeme, leyng ij. fadam
and an halff depe upon the see, a whalle fyssh, by Thornham men
labouryng all nyght on Sunday nyght last was, and so have slayn it, and
brought to lande; upon the whiche your said debite hath ben ther as
yister day, and seysed my lordes part therof; wherof the puple was glad
it shuld so be. Than John a Lowe was there, and he seyd to your debite
that he wold have the Kynges part in this wise, that the Kyng and my
lord shuld part the halff. Sir, the lawe cyvylle seyth thus, ‘If any
fyssh ryall be founde on the se, that is to say, _whalle, bales, sturgion, porpeys, or gra[m]peys_, that my Lord Admyrall shall have
the halvendele,’ &c.

I thynke my lord[116-1] hath the Kynges prerogatyff upon the see, the
whiche I remytte to your discrecion, &c.

Sir, by lyklyhode, without ye take hede and send thedir som of youres,
my lordes part shall be litill. It is a greet fissh and a ryall; your
debite sheweth me it is xj. fadam and more of length, and ij. fadam of
bygnes and depnes in the mydde fyssh.

Sir, remembre what ye have to do; there came not suche a casualte in
your tyme of your office, &c. Wherfore this, by th’enfourmacion of your
sayd debite, cause me to wryte un to you this sympill bille, praying you
to pardone me of the writyng, for it was don in hast; and this bille I
sent to Willyam Brykkes your servant, to Matelask, by masse tyme, to
brynke it to you. And this day they purpose to breke it. Do hereyn now
as it please you, and Allmighti God have you and all youres in Hese
kepyng; besechyng you that this symple bille may recomaunde my pouer
wiff un to your maistershipp.

Wretyn on Candilmas Day, in hast, at Welles.

  Your,

  T. GRIGGES.

    [Footnote 115-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is evidently
    of the same year as that which follows it, to which we refer the
    reader.]

    [Footnote 116-1: The Earl of Oxford was Lord Admiral.]


1030

MARGERY PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[117-1]

_To my rygth wurchypfull mastyr, Syr John Paston, Knyth, this lettyr be
delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1489 / FEB. 10]

Rygth reverent and worchypfull sir, in the most owmble wyse I recomand
me un to yow, desyryng to here of yowre welfare, the qwech God long
contynew.

Sir, myn brodyr Wyllyam recomawnd hym on to yow. And as for the lettyr
that ze sent on to hym, he hath schewyd my lord the entent ther off, and
he thynkyth hym self, that it is no part of hys dute to have any part of
the fysch, or any mony that schuld grow ther of. Never the lasse, my
lord, acordyng as yowr desyre was in the letter, had qwestyond John a
Lowe of thys fych, afor the comyng of John Danyel, what he had doon with
all; and he answerd, as for the nedyr chavyll [_jaw_] therof, he had put
it in sewrte, and leyd it in a howse, be cawse youre debyte [_deputy_]
seasyd it to myn lords use, tyll it myth be undyrstond wedyr the
propyrte ware in the Kyng or in my lord; and so my lord held hym well
content it schud be so, in so moche as the Kyng and my lord have
comawndyd John a Lowe that thys forsayd chavyll schuld be browth up to
the Kyng in all goodly hast.

Fardermore, my brodyr Wyllyam perseyvyd be yowre wrytyng that ye cowd
make the remnawnth of the fych worth a iiij_li._ to my lord. My lord
wold ze schuld not trobyll yowre self no more with all, becawse he
thynkyth that the propyrte is not in hym. And also anodyr, my brodyr
Wyllyam heryth sey in the corte, that the Kyng and my lord be content
that the remenaunt of the fych be to the use of them of the cuntre, the
wech ze schall here the more serteyn therof here after.

Also my broder Wyllyam seyth, that my lord wyllyd yow that ze schuld
send the retorne of the comyscion as hastyly as ze can, and mervell that
ze hath not sent it up or thys.

As touards the brekyng up of the Parlement,[118-1] many lykelywoodes
ther be, that it schuld contynew no wyle, and these be they. My Lord the
Archebyschop of Yorke departyd as zysterday, and my Lord of
Northethomyrlond schall goo as on Fryday; and also all schuch folkys as
schall goo in to Breten schall be at Portysmowth on Satyrday cum
forthnyth, and the Munday after on see bord, at wech seassun the Kyng
intentyd to be ther to take the mustyrs.

And as for thos jantylmen that toke schyppyng to a gon over in to Breten
up on a fortnyth a goo, that is to sey, Syr Richard Egecum, the
cowntroller,[118-2] Sir Roberd Clyfford, Sir John Trobylvyll, and John
Motton, sarjant porter, be a ryvyd ageyn up on the cost of Yngland, save
all only Syr Richard Egecum, wech londyd in Breten, and ther was in a
towne callyd Morleys, wech a non up on hys comyng was besegyd with the
Frenchmen, and so skapyd hardly with hys lyff, the wech towne the
Frenchemen have gotyn, and also the town callyd Breest; how be it the
castell holdyth, as we here say.

And ther be apoyntyd serteyn captens at thys seasun, wech be Lord Bruke,
Sir John Cheney, Sir John of Arundell, Sir John Becham, Sir John Gray,
myn broder Awdley, myn unkyll Syr Gylberd Debnam,[118-3] and Thomas
Stafford, and many odyr knytys and esqwyrys.

And, sir, I thanke yow for the lettyr that ze sent me. Also, syr, I have
fulfyllyd myn pylgremage, thanke it be God.

Also, sir, we undyrstond that it is anactyd of every x. marke of mevable
goodes xx_d._ to the Kyng, besyd the tennyth of every mannys londys.

And, sir, my brodyr Heydon schall send yow the serteyn of all odyr
thyngys grawntyd at thys Parlement, for he hath cawsed John Danyell to
tery all thys day for hys letter, be cawse he was with the Kyng at
Westmestre, that he myth not entend to wryth it tyl nyth.

Also, sir, Master Calthorp hath payd j.C. marke to the Kyng. Also, sir,
I have delyverd the x_li._ to Master Hawes, and reseywed of hym the
oblygacion. Also, I have delyverd the xx^ti marke to Edmund Dorman, be
my brodyr Heydons comawndment.

No more to yow at thys tyme, but God and the Holy Trinyte have yow in
Her kepyng. And myn syster Anne, with all the company, recomawnd hem on
to yow.

Wretyn at London, the x. day of Februar.

  Be yowr servaunt,

  MARGERY PASTON.

    [Footnote 117-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is
    erroneously dated by Fenn 1487-8. Although Lord Woodville made an
    unauthorised expedition into Brittany in the spring of 1488, which
    is alluded to in No. 1026, no succours were sent by Henry for the
    relief of the Duchy till after the crushing defeat of Duke Francis
    at the battle of St. Aubin (July 28, 1488). The Duke died on the
    9th September following, and his daughter Anne became Duchess of
    Brittany. Commissions to raise archers for the relief of Brittany
    were issued in December, and musters were commanded to be taken in
    February 1489.]

    [Footnote 118-1: Parliament was dissolved on the 27th February
    1489.]

    [Footnote 118-2: Sir Richard Edgecombe was Controller of the
    King’s Household.]

    [Footnote 118-3: Sir Thomas Brews, Margery Paston’s father, took
    for his second wife Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Giles, and sister
    of Sir Gilbert Debenham.]


1031

WILLIAM PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[120-1]

_To hys broder, Sir John Paston, be thys letter delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1489 / MARCH 7]

Sir, I recomaunde me to yow, letynge yow wete that . . . . . .
. . .[120-2]

As for my Lord Treserer,[120-3] he was not with the Kynge of all the
counsell tyme, the whyche was endyd on the iij^de day of Marche. And
theder come my Lorde of Northethombyrland the fyrste day of Marche, and
departyd the even afore the makyng of thys letter, and hath endentyd
with the Kynge for the kepynge owt of the Schottys and warrynge on them,
and schall have large money, I can not telle the some for certeyn.

Also ther is an rover takyn at Brystowe, on [_one_] Cowper, as I wene,
and he is lyke to be hanged, and he confessythe more of hys felawis.
Also Edward Heestowe of Dovere is apechyd of treson of many straunge
poynts; and hys accuser and he were bothe afore the Kynge, and then they
were takyn apert. And he hymselfe confessyd it that hys accusere accusyd
hym of, and many other thyngs more than he was accusyd of. And he had
many lords and gentylmen to aunswere for hys trowthe and his demenynge
afore tyme, for, as I hard sey, bothe the Kynge in a maner, nor non of
the tother lords nor gentylmen belevyd not hys accuser, tyl that he
confessyd it hym selfe; and so he is in the Towre and lyke to be dede.

As for the Kynges comynge into the contre. On Monday come fortenyght he
well lye at the Abbey of Stratteforde and so to Chelmnsford, than to Syr
Thomas Mongehombrey, than to Hevenyngham,[121-1] than to Colchestyr,
than to Ipswyche, than to Bery, than to Dame Anne Wyngfelds, and so to
Norwych; and there woll he be on Palme Sunday Evyn,[121-2] and so tary
there all Ester, and than to Walsyngham. Wherefore ye had nede to warne
Wylliam Gogyne and hys felaws to purvey them of wyne i now, for every
man berythe me on hande[121-3] that the towne schalbe dronkyn drye as
Yorke was when the Kynge was there.

Syr, Mayster Sampson recomaunde hym on to yow, and he hathe sende yow a
rynge be Edmonde Dorman, and besydys that he requeryd me to wryte on to
yow that it were best for yow to purvey yow of some gentyl meny thynges
ageyns the Kyngs comyng, for suere he well brynge yow gests i now, and
therfore purvey yow theraftyr. Also he sendythe yow worde that it is my
lords mende that my syster with all other godely folkys there abowt
scholde acompeny with Dame Elsebethe Calthrop[121-4] because there is
noo grete lady ther abowte ageyns the Kyngs comyng, for my lorde hathe
made grete boste of the fayre and goode gentylwomen of the contre, and
so the Kynge seyd he wolde see them sure.

Syr, my lorde hathe sente on to the most parte of the gentyl men of
Essex to wayte upon hym at Chelmnysford, where as he entendythe to mete
with the Kynge, and that they be well apoyntyd, that the Lankeschere men
may see that ther be gentylmen of as grete sobestaunce that thei be able
to bye alle Lankeschere. Men thynke that ye amonge yow wol doo the same.
Your contre is gretely bostyd of, and also the inabytors of the same.
I beseche you to remembr my hors that ye promisyd me. God kepe yow.

Wretyn at Schene in haste, the vij. day of Marche, with the hande of
your brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 120-1: [From Fenn, ii. 158.] This letter was
    unquestionably written in the reign of Henry VII., and not in that
    of Edward IV., to which Fenn assigned it. The writer, William
    Paston, was only born in the year 1459, and was still pursuing his
    studies at Eton so late in Edward’s reign as the year 1479, in the
    end of which year his eldest brother, Sir John Paston, died. The
    Sir John Paston to whom this is addressed must therefore be the
    second son of John Paston, Esquire, who was knighted at the battle
    of Stoke in 1487, and died in 1503. The year in which the letter
    was written is, however, still doubtful. I do not find by the
    Privy Seal dates of Henry VII. that such a progress as is here
    spoken of was ever carried out. Apparently it was intended that,
    beginning on Monday fortnight after the date of the letter, the
    King should occupy a fortnight on the way from London to Norwich,
    and arrive there on Palm Sunday Eve. The year must therefore have
    been one in which Palm Sunday Eve fell between the 5th and the
    11th of April, and Easter Day between the 13th and 19th April. The
    earliest year that will suit these conditions is 1489, when Easter
    fell on the 19th April; and that this was the true date of the
    letter is made probable by several other circumstances. In 1489
    the King was staying at Sheen during March. A great council had
    certainly met in the end of the year 1488 about the affairs of
    Brittany, and is very likely to have prolonged its meetings or
    renewed them from time to time to the 3rd March following.
    Moreover, if our date be correct, it supplies an interesting and
    highly probable fact with regard to Henry, Earl of Northumberland,
    the fourth of the line of Percy, who was slain in an insurrection
    in the north in April following, showing that he was with the King
    at Sheen in the beginning of March, and had undertaken by
    indenture to protect the Borders against the Scots, not long
    before he found himself called upon to put down the King’s
    rebellious subjects in Yorkshire.]

    [Footnote 120-2: Here follows some account relative to a grant
    from the Crown, etc.--F.]

    [Footnote 120-3: John, Lord Dynham.]

    [Footnote 121-1: Not Haveningham in Suffolk, but Heveningham,
    Hevingham, or, as it is now commonly written, Hedingham, in
    Essex, the seat of the Earl of Oxford.]

    [Footnote 121-2: 11th April.]

    [Footnote 121-3: _See_ vol. ii. p. 110, Note 1.]

    [Footnote 121-4: Elizabeth, wife of Sir William Calthorpe, was
    daughter and coheir of Sir Miles Stapleton.]

  [[be thys letter delyvered.
  _first italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


1032

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[122-1]

_To the righte worshipfull and my righte intierly belovyd Sir John
Paston, Knyghte._

[Sidenote: 1489 / MARCH 12]

Righte worshipfull and righte intierly belovyd, I commaunde me to you.
And acording to the Kyng our soverayne Lordis commaundemente late to me
addressid, I desire and pray you that ye woll in all godely haste, upon
the sighte hereof, prepare youre selfe to be in a redinesse with as many
personnes as ye herbyfore grauntid to do the Kyng servyce in my company
diffensibely arayed and therupon so to resorte unto me in all godely
haste possyble upon a day warnyng, horsid and harnessid, to be at the
Kynges wayges. And God kepe yow.

Writen at my castelle of Hedingham, the xij. day of Marche.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 122-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 79.] The date at which this
    letter was written is uncertain, but it may very probably have
    reference, like some later letters in this year, to the King’s
    proposed journey northwards, as it will be seen by the last No.
    that he intended to have visited the Earl at Hedingham.]


1033

WILLIAM PASTON TO THE BAILIFF OF MAUTBY[123-1]

_To the Baly of Mawlteby._

[Sidenote: 1489]

Mayster Baly, I recomaunde me on to yow, praynge yow that ye woll sende
me be Wylliam Kokkys[123-2] berer her of, iiij. nobylles in golde, putt
in to the same boxe that thys byll is in, as thow it wer evydens; for I
have tolde the masengere that he schulde brynge me nothyng but evydens,
for he is in a manere departyng owt of my servyse, wherfore I wold nott
he knew so myche of my counsell. And as for the remenaunte, I wellde ze
schulde kepe it tyll I come my selfe.

And if Bayard be onsolde, I pray yow late hym be made fatte ageyns the
Kynge come in to the contre, what so ever I pay for the kepyng of hym,
and I schall wete how goode a corser I schall be my selfe, at my comyng
in to the contre, be the grace of God, Who have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at Henyngham.

  Be your,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 123-1: [From Fenn, iv. 310.] This letter is dated from
    Heningham, or Hedingham, one of the places which, as we have seen
    in No. 1031, the King was to have visited on his intended journey
    northwards in 1489. I have little doubt, therefore, that it was
    written in that year. The writer, according to Fenn, was William
    Paston, Sir John’s uncle; but it is remarkable that in this same
    year William Paston, Sir John’s brother, writes to him from
    Heningham, and as the signatures of the two Williams were not very
    unlike each other, one may fairly suspect that Fenn has here made
    an error. This suspicion is, moreover, confirmed by the fact that
    Mautby was the property of Margaret Paston, who died in 1484, and
    that it could not possibly have descended to her brother-in-law
    William, though her son William may have had an interest in it.]

    [Footnote 123-2: Fenn prints the name ‘Hokkys,’ but as the reading
    in the modernised version is Cocks, I presume this is a printer’s
    error.]


1034

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO EDMUND PASTON[124-1]

_To my right welbiloved Edmond Paston, Esquier._

[Sidenote: Between 1486-9]

Right welbiloved, I grete you wele. And where as certein landes which
late were the Lord Scales by title of enheritaunce, be discendid to me,
and to my welbiloved cousin William Tyndale, it is accordid bitwixt me
and my said cousin that the profites of the said landes, shalle neither
be taken by my resceivoire nor his, but that an indifferent persone
shalle take and resceive the same profittes to the use of us bothe till
suche tyme as a resonable particion may laufully be made in that behalf.
Wherfore as wele as I my said cousin, havyng speciall confidence and
trust in you, desire and hertly pray you to take the laboure and peyn
atte oure costes and charges, to take and resceive the profites of alle
the said landes, to oure use and behofe, deliveryng alwey the oon moyte
of your receites to my resceivoure, and the other moitee to my said
cousin Tyndale, whan so ever the said profites by you so shalle be taken
and resceived. Yevyng you full auctorite and power by this my writyng to
execute the same.

Written atte Newe Market the vij^th day of Aprill.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 124-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 81.] A portion of the lands of
    Thomas, Lord Scales, whose widow, Elizabeth, married Anthony
    Woodville, Earl of Rivers,--and among others the manor called
    Scales’s Manor in Hockwold,--descended after the death of this
    Elizabeth to William Tyndale, who was knighted at the coronation
    of Arthur, Prince of Wales, on the 30th November 1489. (See
    Blomefield, ii. 180, and Leland’s _Collectanea_, iv. 250-2.) As
    this letter must have been written after the accession of Henry
    VII., when the Earl of Oxford returned from banishment, and before
    William Tyndale was made a knight, the date is between 1486 and
    1489.]


1035

THE SCALES LANDS[125-1]

Edmund Paston, receyvor of the Scalys landes, askyth to be allowed of
xij_li._ xij_s._ viij_d._ whiche hangith over his hede in his accompte
made bifore Robert Sharp at the Feste of the Pureficacion of our Lady
laste paste, for his costes and expenses for two yeres, as hyt apperith
in the sayde accomptes.

Item, the sayde Edmund askyth to be allowed for his costes and expenses
of this yere, Cxviij_li._ iiij_d._, beside his costes commynge and
goynge to this accompte.

Item, for his rewarde of the saide iij. yeres _ad placitum dominorum_.
Whereof ys allowed for his costes by the comaundement of my lorde,

    x_li._

Item, allowed by the[125-2]

  _Endorsed in same hand as the MS._, Billa Edmundi Paston.

    [Footnote 125-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 80.] It is evident that this
    document is at least three years later than the preceding, but it
    is placed here for convenience.]

    [Footnote 125-2: Here the MS. breaks off abruptly.]

  [[of this yere, Cxviij_li._ iiij_d._
  _text unchanged: error for “Cxviij_s._”?_]]


1036

HENRY VII. TO THE EARL OF OXFORD[125-3]

[Sidenote: 1489 / APRIL 22]

Right trusty and entierly beloved cousin, we grete you well. Inasmuch as
it hath liked God to sende us good tidinges oute of Bretayn, such as we
dought not but that ye be desirous to undrestonde, we wryte unto you of
them as thay be comen to our knowlage, and as foloueth.

The Lord Malpertuis, now late with us in ambassade from our dere
cousine, the Duchesse of Bretayne, shippid at our porte of Dortmouth,
and arrived at Saynt Powle de Lyon, in Bretayn, on Palme Sonday,[126-1]
at iiij. after noone, from whens he wrote us the disposicion and the
state of the countre there, and of the landyng and the demeanyng of oure
armee. We received his wrytyng on Monday last, at evynsong tyme; and be
cause he was of Bretayn borne, and favorable to that partie, we ne gave
such trust to his tidinges, as was thought to us surete to wryte to you
theruppon.

This daye, aftre High Masse, comyth unto us from oute of Bretayne
forsaid, and with a new ambassade from our said cousine, Fawcon, oon of
our pursivantes, that ratifieth the newes of the seid Lord Malpertuis,
which ben these.

After the garysson of Frenshmen in the towne of Gyngham[126-2] had
certeinte of the landyng of our armee, thei drewe downe the
fabours[126-3] of Gyngham, and made thayme mete to defende a siege; but
assone as thei undirstode that our said armee jornayned towardes theim,
thei left the same Gyngham, where our said armee arrived the Thursday
next before Palme Sonday, and was received with procession, logged and
received, refreshed in the town iiij. dayes. And goyng towardes the said
Duchesse, thei must passe to the castell and borugh of Monconter. In
that castell was also a garnisson of Frenshemen, which incontinently,
upon worde that our said armee drwe towardes theym, the Frenshmen did
cast downe gret parte of the walles, and fled from thens; in that
castell and borugh our seid armee kept thair Estre. The castell of
Chawson, adjoyning nere to the towne of Saynt Bryak, was also garnisond
with Frenshmen; that castell they set on fire, and soo fled in the
townes of Henebone and Vannes[126-4] were garnisond with Frenshmen,
which breke downe the walles of the townes, and putte them selff to
fligth. Th’inhabitantes a bought Brest have layd siege therunto, and
goten the Base Courte of the Frenshmen or the departyng of our said
pursivaunt. The garnson of the towne of Concarnewe, which is oon of the
grettest strenghes of all Bretayn, was besieged in like wyse, and drevyn
to that necessite that thei with in offerid, ar his said departyng, to
avoyde the towne with staffe in hande; how that is takyn, or what is
more done sithens, he cannot telle.

Oure said cousine, the Duchesse, is in her citee of Raynes; and our
right trusti knyght and counsellour, Sir Richard Eggecombe, there also,
havyng cheeff rule abowte her; and the Marchall of Bretayn arredieth hym
to joyne with them in alle haste with a gode band of men. Mony noble men
of that countree repair to our said armee to take their partie.

These premisses in substaunce we have be wrytyng, aswell from the cheff
capytaynes of our said armee, as from our comptrollour[127-1] forsaid.
And that our said armee, blessid be God, hath among theyme selfe kepte
such love and accorde, that no maner of fray or debate hath bene bitwene
theym sithens the tyme of thair departing out this our Reame. Yoven
under our signed, at our castell at Hartford, the xxij. day of Aprill.


Syr, thys is the copye of the lettyr that the Kynge sente my Lorde of
Oxynford of tydyynges owte of Breten.

  Be yowre brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 125-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter was
    evidently written in the same year as No. 1030, in which it is
    mentioned that Sir Richard Edgecombe and others had gone over to
    Brittany.]

    [Footnote 126-1: 12th April.]

    [Footnote 126-2: Guingamp.]

    [Footnote 126-3: Fauxbourgs, which Fenn supposes here to mean
    portcullises, but I know not if the word was ever used in such a
    sense. Perhaps what is meant is, that they destroyed the suburbs
    to fortify their position.]

    [Footnote 126-4: The word ‘which’ appears to be omitted.]

    [Footnote 127-1: Sir Richard Edgecombe.]


1037

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[127-2]

_To the right worshipfull and my right welbeloved Sir John Paston,
Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1489 / APRIL 30]

Right worshipfull and right welbeloved, I comaunde me to you. And for as
moche as it is certeinly unto the Kynges Grace shewed that my Lord of
Northumberland havyng the auctorite to se the Kynges money levied in the
North parties, had knowleche that certeyne persones of combnes wer
assembled at Topclif, and at a nother lordship of his nygh to the same,
saying that they wolde pay no money; my seid Lord of Northumberland
heryng therof, and that they wer but naked men, addressed hym self
towardes theym withoute eny harneys in pesible maner, trustyng to have
appeased theym. Howe be it, as hit is seid, that he is distressed and
that they have taken hym or slayne hym; whiche the Kyng entendeth to
punysshe. I therfore desire and hertely pray you in all godely haste to
be with me at Hedyngham, there for to knowe more clierly the Kynges
plesir in this behalve. Writen at Hertford the last day of Aprile.

Also I send to you a comyssion of licence to shepp corne, which I pray
you to do to be proclaymed in alle haste.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 127-2: [Douce MS. 393, f. 83.] The Earl of
    Northumberland was slain in the North on the 28th April 1489,
    while endeavouring to put down a revolt against payment of the
    subsidy.]


1038

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[128-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right welbeloved counceilour, Sir John
Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1489 / MAY 6]

Right worshipfull and right welbeloved counceilour, I comaunde me to
you. And where as I understand by your wrytyng that a grete shippe is
perisshed with you in thoo parties, and that ye have ben gretely
occupied aboute the savyng of the goodes of the same; and that the
merchauntes therof ben disposed to put their wynes to sale, of the
whiche ye maye by a ton for C_s._ and litel more; I may by in this
cuntrey for iiij_li._, wherfore if ye may by there eny better chepe,
I pray you to purveye for me, such as ye seme necessary.

And forsomoche as ye may nat be here with me at this tyme, I desire and
pray you to prepare and ordeyne your self with as many men in harneys as
ye godely may, to do the Kyng service in my company, at the Kynges
charge and costes, so as ye and they may be with me at Cambrige, upon
Tewesday[129-1] next comyng; and that ye faile nat herof, as my right
especial trust is in you.

Writen at my castell of Hedyngham, the vj. daye of May.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 128-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] For the date of this
    letter, see preliminary note to the next.]

    [Footnote 129-1: 12th May.]


1039

WILLIAM PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[129-2]

_To hys brodyr, Syr John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1489 / MAY]

Syr, I recomaunde me on to yow. And where as ye desyre that I schulde
sende yow worde of suche tydyng as Phylyp Lewes and Wyndesor bryngythe
fro the corte, they be come thens bothe, but we here of no tydynges that
they brynge, but that yondyr folkys abyde stylle abowte the place where
as thys onhappy dede was done, and not with no grete nowmbyr, they sey
not paste with v. or vj. C., where they were moste. Howbeyt they have
made proclamacions in the cuntrey to mete with oder of ther affynyte as
on Tuesday last past, as it aperythe in the copy of ther proclamacion
heraftyr folowyng. Also they schewe the Kynge intendythe to holde on hys
jurney. And Phylyp Lewes is redyn ageyn to the Kyng, and schall brynge
with hym money for all ther wages that schall be in my lordys retynew,
as yow and vj. of Syr Wylliam Bolens servauntes and od[yrs].

Syr, Mr. Clopton sye [_saw_] yowre lettyr, and a seythe he knew my
lordes mende suche, that he durste not meve hym with it. Ther was Syr
Wylliam Say, but Clopton wolde not it schulde be knowen of non other but
your selfe. He sent my lorde be a servaunt of hys xl_li._ to have
excusyid hym, and it wolde not be takyn, and that I mervell of. Howbeyt
he brake thus fer to my lorde; he asched hym how many he apoyntyd yow to
brynge with yow, and he answerde hym xx^ti, and than he schewyd hym yowr
charges that ye have had. My lorde seyd ye myght have men a nowe, and
ther wages schal be payd for. Clopton aunswerde how that it wolde coste
yow large money, besyde ther wages, to hors them and hernes them; and
how that, to sey the trowthe, ye were not well at ese.

Not withstandynge all thys, my lorde wyllyd that ye schulde come to hym
to Cambryge on Tuesday at nyght, with as many as ye myght, and ye and he
schulde do well i now. Soo Clopton thyngyth that and ye brynge a dosen
with yow, it is suffycyent; howbeyt that Syr Emonde Bedyngfeld, Syr
Thomas Tyrell, and Syr Ryc. Lewes have ben with my lorde, and yche of
them have offyrde to mete with my lorde at Cambryge with xxx. men a pese
of them. So I wolde not ye schulde be to ferre undyr them; wherfor I
thynke best that ye purvey yow so as and ye schulde goo forthe yor
selfe, for I can perseve non othyr wyse.

My bedfelawe Cornwaleys is maryed in the Northe, and he came as
yesternyght to my lorde streyt owt of the contre, and he scheythe
[_showeth_] non othyr wyse but as I have wretyn here afore in thys
lettyr.

Ye schall have for yor self and for yche of your servauntes horsyd and
hernessyd xx_s._ in hande at Cambryge for a monthe, and I truste we
schal have done or xx. days to an ende, with the grace of God, Who have
yow in kepynge.

At Henyngham.

  Be your brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.


[_The Rebels’ Proclamacion._]

To be knowyn to all the northe partes of England, to every lorde,
knyght, esquyer, gentylman, and yeman that they schalbe redy in ther
defensable aray, in the est parte, on Tuysday next comyng, on Aldyrton
More, and in the west parte on Gateley More, the same day, upon peyne of
losyng of ther goodes and bodyes, for to geynstonde suche persons as is
abowtward for to dystroy oure suffereyn Lorde the Kynge and the Comowns
of Engelond, for suche unlawfull poyntes as Seynt Thomas of Cauntyrbery
dyed for; and thys to be fulfyllyd and kept by every ylke comenere upon
peyn of dethe.

And thys is in the name of Mayster Hobbe Hyrste, Robyn Godfelaws brodyr
he is, as I trow.

    [Footnote 129-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It is evident that this
    letter was written shortly after the preceding, which is dated the
    6th May. In that letter Paston is desired to be at Cambridge on
    the Tuesday following to do the King service, and here we find
    that it was intended by the King himself to have been there,
    leading an army against some Northern rebels in person. The
    expressions in the beginning of this letter leave very little
    doubt that the insurrection referred to was that in which the Earl
    of Northumberland was slain on the 28th April 1489.--_See_
    Leland’s _Collectanea_, iv. 246.]

  [[howbeyt that Syr Emonde Bedyngfeld
  _“y” in “Bedvngfeld” either broken or misprinted as “v”_]]


1040

THE BISHOP OF DURHAM TO SIR JOHN PASTON[131-1]

_To the right worshypful sire, and my right trusty and right entierly
wel beloffyd freynde, Sire John Paston, Knyght._

ΙΗΣ. Χρς.

[Sidenote: 1490 / JAN. 27]

Ryght wortchipful sire, and myne especial and of long tyme apprevyd,
trusty and feythful frende, I in myne hertyeste wyse recommaunde me un
to you. And for as myche as I hafe coles and odyr thynges in thise
parties, and also ye hafe in those parties cornes, wyne, and wax, and as
I am enfourmyd ye be noght evyl wyllyd to dele with me, no more than I
am to dele with you in utteryng, and also in receyvyng of suche thynges,
the whiche myght be to the profete of us bothe, I ther fore send un to
you at thys tyme thys berer, William Walkere, gentylman usshere of my
chamber, to commune with you herein, so that by delyberation suche a wey
may be takyn in thys byhalfe as may be to the profete of either of us,
and wher by our familiarite and frendeship may be encrescyd in tyme to
cum. Where un to for our old acquayntance to gedyr, ye shal fynde me ful
redy after my powere, by the grace of our Lorde, Who ever kepe you, and
send you myche worship and long prosperite.

Scribyllyd in the moste haste, at my castel or manoir of Aucland, the
xxvij. day of January 1489.[132-1]

  Your own trewe luffer and frende,

  JOHN DURESME.[132-2]

    [Footnote 131-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 132-1: 1490 according to the modern computation,
    beginning the year in January instead of on the 25th March.]

    [Footnote 132-2: John Sherwood, Bishop of Durham. He was appointed
    to that see by the Pope in 1485 at the solicitation of King
    Richard III. He was a man of high character and learning, and one
    of the earliest Greek scholars in England.]


1041

LUMEN HARYSON TO [SIR JOHN PASTON][132-3]

[Sidenote: About 1490(?)]

Onerabyll and well be lovyd knythe, I commend me on to zour masterchepe
and to my lady zowyr wyffe. I thanke zowyr mastyrchepe that ze have don
for me. I sen my lady a lytyll pes of Renysch wyne of the best, of x.
gallons, and halfe a hondyrd orrygys. I schall send hyr mor a geyns
Pencost that sche may have fresche. And Renold have not gyve me the to
nobyls and xlj_d._, that ze told me off for the wyne. And my servys be
nyzt and be day to zowr commawndment. Zyff zowyr mastyrchep wyll ony
thyng wyth me, I xall be at Cley. No more than God be wyth zow.

Wrytyn up on the Tuysday aftyr Palme Sonday.

  LUMEN HARYSON.

  At zowyr comawndment.

    [Footnote 132-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter was printed
    in volume v. of the original edition, p. 380. I do not know Sir
    John Fenn’s reason for considering it to have been written ‘about
    1490,’ but as I see nothing to the contrary, I keep it under his
    date. The writer was probably one of the German merchants of the
    Hanse, and the name with which he signs the letter seems to have
    been a little Anglicised. It is endorsed by Sir John, ‘Lumen
    Henrikson.’]


1042

SIR JOHN PASTON TO [LORD FITZWALTER][133-1]

[Sidenote: About 1490(?)]

Humbly besecheth your good lordshepe, your dayly servaunt and beedman,
John Paston, more kayteff than knyght, that it may please you of your
specyall grace to dyrect ought your lettres, sygned with your hand and
sealid with your seall, to the dreedfull man, Jamys Radcliff of
Byllingforth, Sqwyer, fermour of your wareyn ther, ought of wheys wareyn
no maner of man nor vermyn dare take on hym, for dought of your seyd
dredfull [man], to take or carye awey eny of your game ther, for fere
[of being] hangyd up among other mysdoers and forfaytours, as wesellis,
lobsters [_stoats_], polkattys, bosartys [_hawks_], and mayne
currys,--that the seyd Jamys shall, upon the syght of your seyd
wryghtyng, delyver, or cause to be delyverd, to your seyd besecher or to
hys depute, delyverer of your seyd lettres, at hys fyrst syght of the
same, vj. coupyll blake conyes or rennyng rabbettys, or some blake and
some whyght to the seyd nombre, to store with a newe grownd of your seyd
besechers at Oxenhed, more lyeke a pynnefold than a parke. And your seyd
besecher shall daylye prey to God for the preservacyon of your noble
estate longe t’endure.

    [Footnote 133-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This humorous petition,
    though it bears no address, was certainly drawn up for
    presentation to Sir John Radcliff, Lord Fitzwalter, the writer of
    Letters 1024 and 1025, for he was lord of the manor of Billingford
    in Norfolk, and James Radcliff, the farmer of his warren, was
    evidently his kinsman. The date is probably, as Fenn suggests,
    ‘about 1490,’ certainly before 1495, when Lord Fitzwalter was
    beheaded. The MS. is a rough draft in Paston’s hand.]


1043

THE EARL OF SURREY TO SIR JOHN PASTON[134-1]

_To my right worshipfull cousine, Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1490, or later]

Right worshipfull cousine, in right harty wyse I commaunde me unto you.
And where I understand by Thomas Hartforde, a bower of Norwiche, berer
herof, hath been putt to grete vexacion and trouble by oon Thomas Hogan,
scomaker, of Norwiche, and that I perceyve ye have harde the matier
depending in travers bitwixt the saide parties; I therfore desire you
that, in the right of the forsayd Thomas Hartford, ye wolbe unto hym
gode maistir, and the bettir for this myn instaunce, as my singler trust
is in you.

And where I conceyve also that the same Thomas is noysed in Norffolk for
a Scotesman borne, ye shall understande that I perceyve wele, by suche
honest folkes as I have hard speke within the citie of York, that the
saide Thomas was borne their, and his fathir there inhabityng, and his
god fathirs and mothers, the which bee right honest persones; and for
that this is true, and not feyned, ye shall understand the Maiour of the
citie of York and his brethern hath made grete instaunce unto me to writ
for the saide Thomas, for whom I must nedes do, because thaye arre my
nye neighbours, as our Lord knoweth, Who have you in His blissid
saufegard.

Written in the castell of Shirefhoton, the xxiiij^th day of Aprill.

  Your lovyng cousin,

  THOMAS SURREY.

    [Footnote 134-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Thomas Howard, Earl of
    Surrey, the writer of this letter, fought for Richard III. at the
    battle of Bosworth, and was taken prisoner. He was, however, after
    some years’ confinement, liberated from the Tower, and taken into
    favour. In 1489 the King sent him into the North to put down the
    rebellion in which the Earl of Northumberland was slain, and
    afterwards made him his lieutenant-general north of Trent; and for
    ten years he resided continually in those parts. The date of this
    letter, therefore, cannot be earlier than 1490, though it may be
    several years later.]


1044

THE EARL OF SURREY TO SIR JOHN PASTON[135-1]

_To my right worshipfull Cousin, Sir John Paston._

[Sidenote: 1490, or later]

Cousin Paston, in my most herty wyse I recomaund me unto you, and thank
you for many kindnesses of tyme past, and also for that ye have bene so
good maister unto my sarvaunt William May, and now at his comyng to me
ye have at your greate coste sent him to me dressed in suche wise as is
veray necessary for me to have men appareled; for the whiche your
kindnesse I think myselfe right muche beholden to do you pleasure and it
moght lye in my power, which I wuld right gladly do, as knoweth our
Lord, whom I beseche to send you moche harte pleasure. Wreten at
Sherifhoton, the vj^th day of July, with the hand of

  Your lovyng Cousin,

  THOMAS SU[RREY].[135-2]

    [Footnote 135-1: [MS. in Pembroke College, Cambridge.] This letter
    may well follow the last as being probably of the same year. At
    all events it lies within much the same range of date.]

    [Footnote 135-2: Mutilated. Below is written in a later hand, and
    also mutilated: ‘Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, the . . . . of
    Scots at Flodden.’ The letter is indorsed ‘Litt. Com. Surrey.’]


1045

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[135-3]

_To the right worshipfull and my right intierly welbelovyd counsellour,
Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1491(?) / MARCH 27]

Right worshipfull and right intierly welbelovyd councellour, I commaund
me hertely to you. And forasmoche as for certayne especiall causes
moving, there be sessions appoynted to be holden at Gyppiswiche, the
Friday sevenyght aftre Estre, which shall be the xv. day of Aprile,
where I purpose then certaynly to be, and to have aswell the matere by
twene Sir Edmounde Benyngfeld[136-1] and Yelverton[136-2] there to be
harde and commenyd, as diverse othre grete maters in that contrey
necessary to be had in comynycacion; I therfor desire and pray you that
ye fayle nat to be there the same day, bryngyng with you the forseide
Yelverton, trusting that then suche direccion shall be takyn in that
matere as can be thought resonable, and to the weale of the parties; nat
doubting but that Sir Edmound Benyngfeld shall be there in like wise.
And Almyghty God kepe you.

Wretin at my castell of Hedingham, the xxvij. day of Marche.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 135-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] As ‘Friday se’nnight
    after Easter’ was the 15th April, Easter Day must have fallen on
    the 3rd in the year in which this letter was written. This would
    suit either 1491 or 1496.]

    [Footnote 136-1: Bedingfield.]

    [Footnote 136-2: William Yelverton, Sir John Paston’s
    brother-in-law, grandson of the Judge.]


1046

HENRY VII. TO THE EARL OF OXFORD[136-3]

[Sidenote: 1491 / APRIL 6]

Ryght trusty and ryght welbelovyd cousyn, we grete yow well, &c. In that
we desyer all the dogers [_fishing smacks_] of thos partes schuld have
our licens to departe in the viage towardes Islond, as they have ben
accustommyd to do yerly in tyme passyd, and that ye woll undertak they
shall have with them no more quantites of graynes then woll only suffice
for ther vitallyng and expensis; we late yow witte that owr fully
interly belovyd cousyn the Kyng of Demarke hath showyd and compleynyd un
to us by dyverse his letters, that when our subjectes come to the seid
Islelond, beyng in hys obeissiance, they stelle, robbe, and exstorte his
subjectes ther ageynse ryght and conciens. Wherfore, the seyd doggeres
fyndyng sufficient surte be forne yow, such as ye will answer unto us,
that they shall not have with them no graynes mo then shall only suffice
for ther vitallyng, nor odyr thyng woth them that ys for bedyn, and that
also they shall not in goyng, comyng, nor in ther beyng at the seyd
Islond, take noo thyng but that they treuly pay or agre for, and frendly
entrete our seyd cousyns subjectes withowth eny robbyng or exstartyng
them in there bodyes ner goodys; we be content the seyd doggeres make
ther viages thedyr at ther libertes, eny our wrytyng or comandment mad
in to the contrary nat withstandyng; and ellys we woll that our
restraynte of ther thedyr goyng stond styll in his strenthe and vertu.

Yovyn ondir our signet, at our maner of Shene, the vj^th day of Aprile.

   *   *   *

JOHN VER, Erle of Oxynford, Gret Chambyrleyn and Admirall of Ynglond,
Viscount Bulbek, and Lord Skalys, to all them that this present writyng
shall see or here, gretyng. And for asmuch as I late have recevyd the
Kyng our Sovereyn Lords letters, beryng date the vj^th day of this
monyth of Aprile, accordyng to a copy of the same, signyd with myn hand,
wiche my ritht trusty servant, John Rowe, Marchall of my Admyralite,
hath for to showe;

Know ye that I, the seyd Erle and Admirall, have assygned and deputyd my
seyd servant to see our seyd Sovereyn Lordes lettyrs pleynly executyd
acordyng to the tenure of the same, and by thys present wrytyng have
yevyn to hym full autoryte and pouer to put undyr arest all such
doggeres as be dysposyd to mak the viage towardes Islond, to such tyme
as they have fownd surte afor me, accordyng to owr seyd Sovereyn Lordys
comandment, for ther demenyng in the seyd viagys.

Yovyn under myn signett and signee manuell the x^th day of Aprile the
vj. yere of the reygne of our seyd Sovereyn Lord Kyng Hery the vij^{th}.

    [Footnote 136-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

  [[our seyd Sovereyn Lord Kyng Hery the vij^{th}.
  _final . missing or invisible_]]


1047

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[138-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right welbeloved Sir John Paston,
Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1491(?) / JULY 31]

Right worshipfull and right welbeloved, I comaunde me to you. And where
as I late receyved your wrytyng, beryng date the xxvj. day of this
present monthe, by the whiche I understand that one Richard Calle toke
certeyne men of werre robbyng upon the coste there; and in somoche as I
understand that they be under the obeissaunce of the Kyng of Denmarke,
I wolle and desyre you that ye delyver theym unto the seid Richard Calle
to take his avauntage of theym as prisoners, seyng my dutee reserved in
every thyng, as my trust is in you. And Almyghty God kepe you.

Writen at my castell of Hedyngham, the last day of Jule.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 138-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is uncertain, but, as Fenn suggests, it is not unlikely to have
    been written in the year 1491, when it may be supposed that Danish
    sailors endeavoured to requite the injuries inflicted by the
    English in Iceland, of which mention is made in the last letter.]


1048

THE OLD AND NEW BAILIFFS OF YARMOUTH TO SIR JOHN PASTON[138-2]

_To oure right reverent and worshipfull and special good maister,
Maister Paston._

[Sidenote: 1491 / [SEPT.]]

Right reverent and worshipfull sir, and oure veray lovyng and curteys
good mayster, we recomaund us on to you in as feythefull wyse as on oure
part aperteynith; and hertely we thanke you for your labour and letter,
whiche ye sent to us be your servaunt, be the whiche we wer asserteynid
of the Kynges pleasure, and to acomplyshe the same, we with the
assistens of youre maistirship wyll put us in oure devoir.

We were at your manoir of Castir to have sen your maistirshyp, but ye
were departyd as well from Yermouth yistirday, as this day from Castre.
We wold have ben joyous to have seen your maistirship, if our fortune so
had ben.

Sir, we be enfourmyd that ore old special good Lord of Oxford, in whom
we founde as gret favour be the mediacion of your maystirship, as ever
we had of any creature, as we have wryting to shewe, in recumpens of
whiche at all tymes sethyn hise lordshyp hathe had our preyeris; and now
we wold have waytid upon hise lordshyp, but your maystirship knowith
well we may not be absent on Mychilmesse Day for dyverse consederacions.
Wherfore we beseke your good maystirshyp, ye lyke of your jentilnesse,
to recomaund us unto our seyd good lord, and to make our exkuse to hym,
and to do hyse lordshyp [to be] presentyd with a porpeyse, whiche we
send yow be the brynger of thys; and if we had any othyr deyntes to do
hym a pleasure, we wold, that knowyth God, Whom we beseke of Hyse
infenit mercy to preserve the Kyng our Soverayn Lord, and oure seyd good
lord, and you, and all the frutys of you from all adversite.

  Youre loveres and bedmen, the old Baliffes of Yermouth,
  and the newe Balyffes that now shalbe.

    [Footnote 138-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] ‘Several ordinances,’
    says Fenn, ‘respecting corporation business, made by the men of
    Yarmouth, through Sir John Paston and Lord Oxford’s attention to
    them, received the King’s assent by his Attorney-General in 1491.
    It was for their activity in those matters, I presume, that this
    letter of thanks, etc. was addressed to Sir John.’ The time of
    year appears by the letter itself to be about Michaelmas.]


1049

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[140-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right intierly welbelovyd counceillor,
Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: About 1491(?) / OCT. 20]

Right worshipfull and right intierly welbelovyd counceillor, I comaund
me to you. And where as I late have receyved your writing, wherby I
. . . . . . the demeanyng of Richard Barkeley and his shipp as other,
I have ta . . . . . . . . of hym to be redy at all tymes to answer to
all suche thynges as can be l . . . . . . . . . he demeanyng. I woll
therfor that ye suffre hym, his men and shippys, . . . . . . . . d as
for a last of hering and an half, whiche I undirstond by hy . . . . . .
of his, I woll that ye delyver hit to the countroller of my howshold. A
. . . . . . . o put undyr suertie all suche hering so takyn or revid by
the carveyll of . . . . . . . any other. And God kepe you.

Wretin at Melford, the xx. day of Octobre.


And where as I am enformyd that ye take hym nat for my servaunt, and so
he ys noysed in the contrey ther, I woll that hit be knowin that I take
hym as my servaunt, and so will do as long as I know no cause of the
contrary.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 140-1: [From a MS. in the Bodleian Library.] The MS. of
    this letter is mutilated, but it is perfectly intelligible, as it
    is the first of three relating to the same subject, of which Fenn
    has printed the second in his fifth volume. The date of the matter
    referred to is, however, uncertain, and I follow the example of
    Fenn in assigning the correspondence conjecturally to the year
    1491, in which we have other letters from the Earl, as Admiral, to
    Sir John, as his Vice-Admiral.]


1050

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[141-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right intierly welbelovyd councellour,
Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: About 1491(?) / OCT.]

Right worshipfull and right intierly welbeloved councellour, I comaund
me to you. And where as I undirstond, by your writing to me delyverid by
this berar, the roborye and dispoyling of certayn Corvers of Holond and
Selond, done by the shipp callyd _the Foole_, wherof Robert Spenser was
maister, aswell in herryng, vitayle, and takelyng, as ye be enfourmyd by
iij. personnys of the same shippe, and of th’entent and disposicion of
the master and feleshyp of the same, whiche shewe, as ye write, that
Barkeley, aswell with that shipp as with a prise that he hathe bought,
late takyn of the Frenchemen, were disposid and determenyd to do myche
harme, wherupon ye have indevorid you to breke the same; how be hit that
the seid Barkeley hath be late with me, and found suertie in a C_li._ to
answer to all suche demeanyng, when he shall be callyd; and therupon I
wrote to you to suffre hym, his men, and shippis to departe at libertie;
yet nevyrtheless, concidering your large writing, I can nat be content
in my mynde to suche tyme as I may here bothe you and Barkeley to geder;
willing therf[or that ye do] kepe the shippys and goodes in suertie, and
to be with me your selfe . . . . . . . . well may, bringyng with you
suche iij. personnys as have . . . . . . . . . certaynte of this mater;
and so I have wretin to Barkeley . . . . . se to answer to the same. And
God kepe you.

Wretin . . . . . . . of Octobre.

Also yf the be eny of the Duchemen . . . . . . . . any sute for ther
gode, that ye then cause one of . . . . . . . to shewe and clayme ther
owne.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 141-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] _See_ preliminary note
    to last letter.]


1051

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[142-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right welbeloved counceilour, Sir John
Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: About 1491(?) / OCT. 28]

Right worshipfull and right welbeloved counceilour, I comaunde me to
you. Certifieint you that I wolde have be right glad to have had you,
the iij. persones that enformed you of Berkeleys demenyng, and Berkeley
togeder, to th’entent that I myght have had ripe knowleche of their
demenyng, to have shewed the Kynge at my comyng unto His Grace.
Nevertheles, sith I understand by your late wrytyng, to me brought by
the seid Berkeley the xxviij. day of this present monthe, beryng date
the Monday next before Seynt Symond Day and Jude, that ther is nat so
grete defaute in the same Berkeley as ye by your former writinges to me
sent wend [_thought_] ther had be, and that the defaute, if eny be, is
in one Spenser, maister of the shippe belongyng to the seid Berkeley,
and that ye thynke also that such suretee as I have take of the same
Berkeley is sufficient inogh, better or more than nedeth for that cause,
and that in your mynde ye thynke he woll be of gode guydyng and demenyng
in tyme comyng; I woll and desire you that ye delyver hym his shippes,
men, and goodes, accordyng to my first wrytyng to you sent in that
behalve. And Almyghty God kepe you.

Writen at my castell of Hedingham, the xxviij. day of Octobre.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 142-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 90.] _See_ preliminary note to
    Letter 1049.]


1052

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[143-1]

_To my righte trusty and righte welbelovyd counceillours, Sir Rauff
Shelton and Sir John Paston, Knyghtes._

[Sidenote: Year uncertain]

Righte trusty and righte welbelovyd counceillours, I comaunde me to you.
And ffor as moche as one Thomas Charlys of Norwiche late hathe presentid
unto me a bille of complaynte agaynste Symonde White, gentylman,
dwellyng in Shotesham, shewing by the same suche wrongis as the saide
Symonde hathe done and daily dothe to the saide Thomas, as by the saide
bille, whiche I sende you with this, more playnely apperith; I therfor
desire and pray you that ye woll do calle the saide parties byfore you,
and upon due examinacion had upon the mater conteyned in the saide
bille, ye take suche direction as may acorde with righte and gode
consciens, so as the saide Thomas Charlis heraftur have no cause to
resorte to me complaynyng. And Almightie God kepe you.

Writen at my castelle of Hedingham, the xv. daye of Septembre.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 143-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 89.] This letter is quite
    uncertain in point of date, except that it must have been written
    between 1487 and 1503. We place it, therefore, for convenience,
    after other letters of the Earl of Oxford.]


1053

WILLIAM PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[143-2]

_To the ryght worchepfull Sir John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: 1492 / FEB. 18]

Aftyr all dew recomendacion, lyke it yow to undyrstond that Syr Herry
Heydon schewyd me that it is agreyd be Syr Edmond Bedyngfeld, that the
mater betwyx hym and my brodyr Yelverton[143-3] schalbe comynd at
Norwyche, and there a dyreccion to be takyn in the same mater, mete for
them bothe.

Syr, the Kyng sendythe ordynaunce dayly to the see syde, and hys tentes
and alys [_pavilions_] be a makyng faste, and many of them be made; and
there is also grete provysyon made be gentylmen that scholde goo wythe
Hys Grace for hors, harnese, tents, halys, gardyvyans [_knapsacks_],
cartes, and othyr thynges that scholde serve them for thys jurney that
the Kynge entendythe to take on hand, soo that belykelyod Hys Grace
wolbe goyng sone upon Ester. And so I entende, aftyr that I here
heaftyr, to goo to Caleys to purvey me of harneys, and suche thynges as
I schall nede besydes hors, undyr that forme that my costes schalbe payd
fore.

Syr, I am as yet no bettyr horsyd than I was whan I was wythe yow, nor I
wote not where to have none, for hors flesche is of suche a price here
that my purce is schante [_scarce_] able to bye one hors; wherfor I
beseche yow to herkyn [_hearken_] for some in yowre contre. Syr, my
cosyn, John Heydon, tolde me that the Prior of Waburnes horse was rially
amendyd, and that the Abott of Seynt Benetes schewed hym there was a bay
hors of a persons nyght onto Seynt Benetis, and that the abot wolde gete
hym for my cosyn Heydon at a resonable price. Syr, my cosyn, John
Heydon, woll geve me hys entrest in that hors, if the abot have bowght
hym, and so ye may lete the abot have knowlege; and if he have not
bowght hym, I beseche yow sende to see hym, for I wote not how to do
withowt yowre helpe aswell in horsyng of me as in other thynges.

At the makyng of thys lettyr, I cannot acerteyn yow what person it is
that owythe thys hors. If I can know, I wolle send yow worde in a bylle
I sende to Thomas Jullys be the berer herof.

Syr, as towardes my jurney to Caleys, the whyche I entende [_intended_]
to have tane at my laste beyng with yow, it was so, I was dysapoyntyd of
Thomas Dey and an other man I scholde have had be hys menys, as ye have
had knowlege of or now; and also I had went [_thought_] to have had
folkys a mette with me at Hedyngham, whyche ded nott. My lorde,[144-1]
seyng me dysesyd, and also none otherwyse purveyd, wyllyd me in ony wyse
to tary on tyl hys comyng to London, and sent myn excuse to my Lorde
Dawbeney undyr thys forme how that I was sore disesyd; notwythestondyng
I was welewyllyd to have come to fulfyll my promesse, but he cowde not
sofyr me, seyng me soo dysesyd; and so my Lord Dawbeney was sory of my
dysese and content that I taryd.

Syr, I beseche yow to holde me excusyd for kepyng of Thomas Lynsted,
yowr servaunt, and hym bothe. It is soo that he and I bothe have ben in
hand with my unkyll[145-1] for hys mater, and yett wee have hym at noo
good poynt; but I troste we schall have. Syr, if I take thys jurney to
Caleys, I moste beseche yow to forbere hym lenger, and if I goo not to
Caleys, thow I be lothe to forbere hym, yet I schall brynge hym with me
schortly in to Norfolke, ye to have hym, if ye lyste, with the grace of
God, Who have yow in kepyng.

Wretyn at London, the xviij. day of February, with the hande of yowre
pore brodyr,

  WYLLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 143-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter refers to
    Henry VII.’s proposed invasion of France, which, after long
    preparation, actually took place in October 1492.]

    [Footnote 143-3: William Yelverton, the grandson of the Judge, who
    married Anne Paston, the writer’s sister.]

    [Footnote 144-1: The Earl of Oxford.]

    [Footnote 145-1: William Paston the elder.]

  [[Hys Grace for hors, harnese, tents,
  _text reads “or hors”: corrected from Fenn_]]


1054

ROGER L’ESTRANGE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[145-2]

_To the ryth worchypfull Syr John Paston, Knyth, be thys delyveryd._

[Sidenote: 1492 / APRIL 16]

Mastyr Paston, I recomawnd me to yow. Syr, so it is that I am not yet
purveyd of men to my nowmbyr of archers, suych as chold go hovyr see
with me; wer for, syr, I be ceche yow that it wold plese yow at thys
tyme to do so mych for me as to a purveyd me of ij. or iij., such as ye
thynk chold be for me.

Syr, I undyrstond Syr Tery Robstertt lyth but lyttyll from yow, were, as
I trow, he myde help me of j. by yowyr menys, and as for ther wages,
they xall have the Kynges wages and some what elles, so that I trost
that they xall be plessyd. Syr, I be cech yow to tak the peyne for me at
thys tyme, and I xall do yow that servys that lyth in me, by the grace
of Jesu, Ho preserve you.

On Monday next aftyr Palme Sonday, by yowyr howne to hys pouyr,

  ROGER LESTRAUNGE.

Syr, I be sech yow that thys byll may recomawnd me on to my lady,[146-1]
and I trost I xall a wayt on you sone on Estyr.

    [Footnote 145-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is probably
    of the year 1492, when the King was going over to France. But
    there are other occasions, both earlier and later, on one of which
    it might have been written.]

    [Footnote 146-1: Probably Margaret, first wife of the Earl of
    Oxford.]


1055

WILLIAM BARNARD TO WILLIAM PASTON[146-2]

_To his right wurchipfull master, William Paston, and Mr. Deryk dwellyng
with my Lord of Oxinford, this lettir be delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: About 1492]

Right wurchipfull Maister William Paston, with myn good Lord of
Oxinford, and myn welbelovyd Mr. Deryk, I recomaund me on to you. And it
is soo that I kepe a prisoner of my lordis to answer to William Greve,
maryner of Gret Yermouth, the wiche he brought hym to me by my lordis
auctorite of a warand from Bell Key; and the seid William Greve chargid
me with his prisoner, named Phillyp Barbour, and chargid me with hym for
x_li._, and so I kepe hym, and have kept hym this ij. yer and an half.
And I have aftyr and many tymes askyd and requyred of the seid William
Greve of mony for his bord, for he promysid and appoynted with me for
every weke ij_s._, and I to take charge for to answer hym of hys
prysoner aforseid; and so I have be chargith with hym ij. yeris and an
half to my gret cost and charge, and nowh the seid William Greve
intendith to pay me noon mony, butt he is a bowght to remeve the
prysoner by a pryvy seall to abarre me from myn mony. Wher I am enformyd
that noon prysoner of my lordis shuld nat be remevyd out of my lordis
pryson, nor crafftid so out of pryson till he had answerd ther to seche
causes as he lyth fore, and specially for alle suche costis and chargis
as his kepar is charged for hym for his costis of exspensis; and that
doon, I woll be redy to delyver hym to the seid William Greve [to] pay
me for his costis as it shalbe demyd with reason. Besechynd and prayeng
you bothen too to be so good ma[istris unto] me that ye woll shewe this
mater on to my lord, and to knowe my lordis meend whedyr it shall please
hym that I shall delyver hym by a pryvy seall in this causis or nay, for
the bryngar herof is the prysoner. And if it be my lordis mend that the
prysoner shall appere to that pryvy seall, that it woll plese my lord to
be so good and gracyous lord on to the prysoner to send hym to his
councell to London, to tendyr this mater for the pore prysoner, and to
consydre the gret losse that the seid William Greve intendith to putto
his servaunt William Barnard, marchall and kepar of [my] lordis gayle in
Yermouth, and servaunt [to?] Robert Crowmer, depute for my lord in the
partyes of Norffolk and Suffolk. I shuld a browte up my silf, but we be
now in gret besynes in kepyng of my lordis honorabyll courtis in
Norffolk and Suffolk.

Wretyn the last day of Aprill.

  By your,

  WILLIAM BARNARD,

  that I can or may.

    [Footnote 146-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The date of this letter
    is very uncertain, but it is probably about the year 1492, as
    William Paston does not seem to have been in the Earl of Oxford’s
    service many years before or after that date.]


1056

EDMUND PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[148-1]

_To the ryght wurshupfull Sir John Paston, Knyght, be this delyvered._

[Sidenote: Before 1493]

Ryght wurshypfull Sir, I recomawnd me to zow. As zesterday I was with my
cosyn Clere;[148-2] he lythe at Borow, and my mastres hys
wyveffe,[148-3] be cause the plage reygnyth at Ormysby. And so of hys
own mocyon he mevyd to me of the maryage of my nevew zour soon, and as
glad foolkes woold be to bargayn as ever ze wyste, and soo hathe shewyd
me that ze shuld have as myche as Sir E. Bedyngfelld, whyche was v. C.
marke. Moore over he shewyd that he woold depart with it to Sir Roger
T.[148-4] or to Harry Colett, whyche he shewyd ze woold not of, but to
have the mony at zour dysposyssyon; and me semys be hys report that he
knowyth well that yf ze delle with Sir H. H.,[148-5] he wyll be in a
suerte that the mony that he shuld depart with shuld goo to the redemyng
of zour landes, and other zowr dawngeres. More over he shewyd me that
the mony whyche ze skyftyd of H. Colett was th[oug]ht be Sir Harry H.
that Sir R. Townesend shuld have ben contentte with it, whyche is knowyn
the contrary, and causyd hym to geve delay in that be halffe to zow.
I know well this jantylman berythe zow as good mynde as any man alyve,
my mastres hys mother,[148-7] and allso my mastres hys wyve in lyeke
wyesse; and me semys he makys not the dowghttes to delyver zow hys mony
that other men do of the delyverye of thers. Foor trowthe, he shewythe
me hys mynde, whyche is thus: yf ze wyll putt lande in feffement for
zeres, to the full contentacyon of Townesend, Colett, and of my uncle,
whyche he and all men thynke ze muste be charged to, or ever ze goo
thorow, and that zour next frendes have the receyte of it tyll it be
full contente and payed, thus, or suche a suer weye to be had for the
well of all parteys, I darre say he is not alyve wyll indevour hym with
better wyll to deele with zow, and, as my mynde servys me, streytte
hymsylffe, as it may be booryn, be syde my mastes hys modyrs v. C. My
mastres hys wyffe, on my feythe I darr say, the moste harty body to zow
wordes in this be halffe that is alyve, and the fayneeste body woold be
to have it accomplyshyd.

Syr, I thenke ze be to wardes London, and well I woot zowre mynde is to
ease zour sylffe as hastely as ze may; I pray God ze do to zour honur,
and to zour moste well to gederys.

Marchandes or new jantylmen I deme wyll proferr large; noon other
dyspreysed, ze know the contynewance of this man, and how he is alyed.
Well I woott yf ze depart to London, ze shall have proferes large; yf
zour jornay be not but to ease yow in that be halfe, be my poor avyce
slake for iij. or iiij. days, for ever me semys I shuld not have ben
brokyn to so largely, but that they entende it hastely to say to zow.
Sythe I was ther, I undyr stande yf it had not happyd me to have seyne
them as zester day, she wold this day have made her cowntenance to have
seyn her nes, Bothas (?) dowter, wyche is at Pallynges for fere of the
plage, and have comyn seyne [_come and seen_] my wyffve, and specyally
to have de syrid us to meve zow towardes them, and in trowthe so she
hasse.

I pray God ze do as well to zour honur as I woold do my sylfe. Yf ze
wyll tery thys lytell season be foor rehersyd, yf ze lyste, I woott well
ze may have the mater moor largely comyned; and yf ze tary tyll Monday,
I wyll awayte on zow to Hynengham, with Godes grace, Who ever preserve
zow and zours.

  Your,

  E. PASTON.

    [Footnote 148-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter cannot be
    later than the year 1493, as Sir Roger Townsend died on the 9th
    December in that year (Inq. p. m. 10 Hen. VII., No. 170). Moreover
    the will of Elizabeth Clere of Ormesby was proved, according to
    Blomefield, on the 6th March 1492-3. But as Sir John Paston’s
    eldest son was only born in 1478, the date is not likely to be
    many years earlier.]

    [Footnote 148-2: Sir Robert Clere of Ormesby.]

    [Footnote 148-3: Probably his first wife Anne, daughter of Sir
    William Hopton. His second was Alice, daughter of Sir William
    Boleyn.]

    [Footnote 148-4: Townsend.]

    [Footnote 148-5: Sir Henry Heydon.]

    [Footnote 148-7: Elizabeth, widow of Robert Clere of Ormesby, the
    father of Sir Robert. She was the daughter of Thomas Owydale,
    Uvedale, or Dovedale, of Tacolneston, in Norfolk.]

  [[Footnote and tag 148-7
  _there is no note 148-6: numbering retained for cross-references_]]


1057

SIR HENRY HEYDON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[150-1]

_To myn ryght worchypfull cosyn, Sir John Paston, knyght._

[Sidenote: 1488-1492 / MARCH 4]

Cosyn Paston, I recommend me to you and wn to myne good ladie your wiff.
As for your mater betwyx you and your wncle,[150-2] I have shewid it soe
to my ladie of Norffolk and to hym, that it is agreed yee to entre in to
Marlyngford and all other maners in debate in your name, and to kepe
your courtes, sell your wodis, and to doo therwith as with your own.
Wherupon I avise you, as soone as ye may, send som discrete man to kepe
your courtis and to lette your fermys and selle your wodis to your most
avayll. Your presens theer shall bee costly, and what is bee heende in
the fermourz or tenauntz handez sethyn the rekenyng last be ffor myne
ladiez servauntz and yourz, that thei bee warnyd kurtesly to paie it by
a day, except in ony wise I avyse you nat to make ony thretis to ony
fermour or tenaunt, for ony dealing affor this tyme, but to gett in
fayernesse till I speke with you; and in ony wyse that yee nor ony your
servauntz have noon wordis in this mater, but that it is agreed bee myne
ladie you to have your peasebill possession. And as for Huntingffeldis,
as yee have beffore ocupyed, ocupie still without noyse. I pray you
folowe myne avise in this. I have hadde laubour, I trust thorowe your
cause it shall nat be in vain _laboraverunt_, and suffyr this bill
hyddyr too to speke to your sellf in privite, and to noon other. How yee
and myne ladie, and in what sylk or clooth yee will have these tweyn
yong innocentis[150-3] maried inne, iff it shuld bee purveyed at London
to send me word, or ellys at Norwich, as it shall please you and myne
ladie, ther after I shall applie me. For it must bee ordyrd be you in
the yong husbondis name. Your penauns off your wncles mater shall yee
knowe whan I kom hoome. Ther is non other meane but to sell your wodis
and tymber in all your manors to your most avayll, except theere as it
kan nat bee forborn for diverse causys. And iff you list to command mee
ony thyng in these partyez, send me word be myn servaunt, berer heerof.

Wretin the iiij^th day off March.

  Your own to his powr,

  H. HEYDON.

    [Footnote 150-1: [Add. MS. 33,597, f. 9.] This letter must be
    addressed to the later Sir John. The manor of Marlingford belonged
    to Agnes Paston, who died about the same time as her grandson the
    first Sir John, and her right accordingly descended to his brother
    John, who was knighted at the battle of Stoke, 16th June 1487. His
    claim was disputed for a time by his uncle, but some arrangement
    was come to, apparently before the year 1493. (_See_ No. 1056.)]

    [Footnote 150-2: William Paston, son of the judge.]

    [Footnote 150-3: Probably Sir John Paston’s eldest son and a
    daughter of Sir Robert Clere. (_See_ No. 1056.)]


1058

SIR T. LYNG TO SIR JOHN PASTON[151-1]

_To my rigth wurchypful master, Sir John Paston, Knyth, in hast._

[Sidenote: 1494 / NOV.]

Memorandum, that thes be the namys that war mad Knytes of the Bath, the
Thwrsday be for Alhalow Day.

  Fyrst, My Lord Herry, Duke of Yorke.
  My Lord Haryngton, Lord Marcas sun.[151-2]
  My Lord Clyfford.
  My Lord Fyvaren.
  My Lord Dakyr of the Sowth.
  My Lord Strange. Lord Stranges sun.
  Sir John Arundell of the West.
  Sir Water Grefyth of Lonkaschyre.
  Sir Jarveys a Clyffton of Yorkechyre.
  Sir Roberd Harcorth of the West.
  Sir Edmund Trayford.
  Sir Herry Marney of Esexe.
  Sir Roger Newborow.
  Sir Raff Rither of Yorkechyre.
  Sir Thomas Bawd of Harforth chyre.
  Sir John Speke.
  Sir Houmfrey Fulford.
  Sir Roberd Lytton.
  Sir Pers Egecome.
  Sir Roberd Clere.
  Sir Thomas Fayrefaxe.
  Sir Richard Knythley.
  Sir Wyllem Cheke.

Also Master Robert Southwell is Hey Schreve of Norffolke.

Memorandum, that saforn is at xvj_s._ j_li._ the lowest price.

Also, the Kynge and the Qwene went crowned on Halowmesse Day last; and
my Lord of Schrewsbery bare my Lord Harry, Duke of Yorke, in hys harmys;
and x. byschopis, with myters on ther hedes, goyng be for the Kyng that
day rownd a bowt Westmynster Hawle, with many odyr gret astates.

Sir, ther hath be so gret cownsell for the Kynges maters, that my Lord
Chawnsler kept not the Ster Chawmber thys viij. days, but one day at
London, on Sent Lenardes Day.

  Be yowre pore prest and servaund,

  SIR T. LYNG.

The lowest pryse of saforn is xvj_s._

Item, the Knytes of the Bath.

Item, the Knytes of the Schyre.

Item, of recordes a yenst me.

Syr, ther hath record a yenst me, Syr John Seyve, Vecry of Barton, John
Anond, Richard Elwyn of Wytton, John Bowlond of Totyngton, sumnor, whech
arne all forsworyn on the Crwsifyxe a yenst me.

    [Footnote 151-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter gives the
    list of the Knights of the Bath made on the occasion of Henry the
    King’s second son being created Duke of York in 1494.]

    [Footnote 151-2: Thomas Grey, son of Thomas Grey, first Marquis of
    Dorset, who succeeded his father in 1501.]

  [[Sir Thomas Bawd of Harforth chyre
  _spacing unchanged_]]


1059

THE CORPORATION OF YARMOUTH TO SIR JOHN PASTON[153-1]

_To our right honorable and especyall good maister, Ser John Paston,
Knyght, this letter be delyvered in hast._

[Sidenote: 1495 / JULY 11]

Right wurchipfull ser, we recomaund us onto your good maistership,
sertefyeng you that Robart Albon of Yermouth with many more of our
neybors, this Saterday arn comen hom from Caunterbury. And Robart Albon
hath spokyn with the English captayns of the Kynges rebellys ther, part
of theym that arn takyn; and Robart Albon and his company seith that
ther wer takyn and slayn to the noumbre of vij^xx., wherof were v.
captayns, iiij. of them he named, oon Mounford, Whyght, Belt, and
Corbett: he coude nott telle the fyfft capteyns name. And they told hym
that they have apoynted to have a town of strength, for they wold an had
Sandwich, and the countre had nott a resistid them. And so Belt seid on
to Robart Albon he wyst weell that he was but a deed man, and for
asmoche as he wist that he was of Yermouth, he shewid hym that they woll
have Yermouth or they xall dye for it, as Robart seyth to us.

And this is a mater of trewth, and therfore we desyre and pray your good
maistership, that we may have your myghty help of ayde and socowr, and
that it woll please you to comon with Maister Mayer of Norwiche, to meve
hym of hys sokour, but in especyall that we may have your maistership
amongs us, with suche strength of your good councell, as your
maistership shall thynk most best for the Kynges pleasur, and for the
sewyrtye of us alle; for we putt us in devyr to furnysh the town with
all that we can doo, for we know noon oder but that they may be here by
possybylyte this nyght or to morow att nyght at the ferdest. No more to
you, but Jesu preserve you.

Wretyn at Yermouth, in hast, this Saterday, the xj. day of July.

  Be your owyn, the Balyffes of Yermouth,
  with our Brethern and
  Comons of the same Town.

    [Footnote 153-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter refers to
    the attempt of Perkin Warbeck at Deal, where a number of his
    followers landed on the 3rd July 1495, and were all either killed
    or taken prisoners by the people.]


1060

ROBERT CROWMER TO SIR JOHN PASTON[154-1]

_To my right especyall and syngler good maister, Ser John Paston,
Knyght, this letter be delyvered._

[Sidenote: 1495 / JULY 12]

Wurchipful ser, I recomaund me on to you. Maister Balyffes, with alle
myn Maisteris of the town of Yermouth, thankith you hartilly, and
trustyng feythfully of your ayde and comford at neede; and if any suche
cause happith with us, they woll feythfully send you word in all the
hast possyble, up on the syght of the shippis.

Ser, ferdermor, ther is a ship of our town come hom from Seint John of
Amyas, and he seyth that on Seint Thomas Day[154-2] ther came to Seint
Wallrens,[154-3] in Normandie, an hoye of Dorderyght, with viij. horsis,
with many saddilles and brydilles; ther in wer viij. or ix. Englysh men,
the wiche toke the shippes boot, and went on lond at Staplis,[154-4] and
arn renne a wey up in to the cuntre. And the Admiralles Depewty sesonyd
the ship and hors, and all that they found ther in, to the Kyng our
soverayn Lordes behooff; and the Duche men were leyde in pryson. This is
a mater of trowth, for William Carre of our town, maryner, and oder of
our town, see this doon in deed. And as for the shippes with the Kynges
rebellars, they be furth out of Cambyr[155-1] westwards; whyder they be,
thei can not sey, but the Duche men seid to William Carre that they
trustid on one man shuld help them with many men. Thes is suche tydynges
as the Amyas men brout hom.

Ser, if it woll please your maistership that ye myght have leyser,
I desyre and pray you to come sporte you, and to see how weell we have
appareld and furnyshid our town, I wold be right gladd, and I trust to
Almyghty God that it wold please your maistership right weell, and with
your betyr advyce we woll doo more to our power, that knowith God, the
wiche Lord preserve you.

Wretyn at Yermouth, on Relyk Sonday.[155-2]

  By your servaunt,

  ROBART CROWMER.

    [Footnote 154-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter refers to
    the dispersion of Warbeck’s fleet after the attempt at Deal. It
    would appear, as Fenn remarks, that on receipt of the preceding
    letter Sir John had promised aid to the town of Yarmouth, for
    which promise they here return thanks. The handwriting of this
    letter is the same as that of the last.]

    [Footnote 154-2: The Feast of the Translation of St. Thomas
    Apostle, 3rd July.]

    [Footnote 154-3: _Qu._ St. Vallery?]

    [Footnote 154-4: Etaples.]

    [Footnote 155-1: The point called the Camber, near Rye.]

    [Footnote 155-2: Relic Sunday is the third Sunday after Midsummer
    Day, and fell on the 12th July in 1495.]


1061

ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF NORFOLK, TO SIR WILLIAM KNIVET AND OTHERS[155-3]

_To my ryght entyerly and welbelovid frendes, Sire William Knevette,
Sire John Paston, Sire Robert Clere, Knyghtes, the Kynges Attorney,
Phelippe Calthorpe, Richard Suthwell, Squyers, and to yche of theym._

ELIZABETH, DUCHESSE OF NORFFOLK.

[Sidenote: 1495 / SEPT. 14]

Right entyerly welbelovyd frendys, I comaunde me to you. And for as
moche as I understande that Sire Harry Grey, that is the verry owner and
possessioner of the maner of Ketryngham, is nowe in gret age, and as it
is seide, of right seekely disposicion, and that after his deceasse the
right and title therof shall of right belonge to my right welbelovid
servaunt Thomas Martyn, and his nevewe and heyre of blood, and his eyre
therof by reason of entaylys:--What the seid Sire Harry entendith to do
therin, I knowe not, but it rennyth in reporte, that he is in purpose to
disherite the seid Thomas Martyn therof, contrary to all right and good
conscience. In eschuenge wherof, I desire and pray you as hertely as I
can, that it wull leeke you to be so good maistyrs to the seid Thomas
as, by your wisdams and discrecion, the seid Sire Harry, by you or some
of you, may be moved of conscience and of kyndenesse to his blood to
have regard to the seid right, and not to do eny thyng that shuld be
disheryson to his seid nevewe, and to have the more tender consideracion
to your mocion, for that the seid Thomas is to dyverse of you of kynne
and aliaunce, and to many other gentilmen within the shere in leeke cas.
And for the consideracion that I have, that the seid Sire Harry and
Thomas his nevewe, were of my lordes nere blode, whoes soule Jesu pardon
and assoyle, it were to gret a pete to see hym by disheryson to falle to
penury and poverte, wher by your good exortacion in consideracion of the
premissis, and mo odir by your wisdamys to be remembred, in the lif of
the seid Sire Harry suche inconveniences may be better remadyed; wherin
ye shall not only do an almas dede, and a gret pleasir to God, but also
to me for that blodes sake a singuler pleasir, and cause me heraftir
therather to considir thynge that shall concerne your resonabill
pleasir, with Goddes grace, Who ever kepe you.

At Erle Soham, this xiiij^ne day of Septembyr.

    [Footnote 155-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The writer of this
    letter was the widow of John Mowbray, the last Duke of Norfolk of
    that name, who died in 1475. She survived her husband many years,
    and Fenn says, though I know not on what authority, that she was
    alive in 1496. Sir Harry Grey, it appears, made his will on the
    28th September 1492 (Blomefield, v. 93), and one might imagine
    this letter was written in the same month and year. The
    inquisition upon his death, however, was only taken on the 26th
    October, 12 Hen. VII. (1496), and it does not state the day on
    which he died. The jurors found Thomas Martyn, who was then thirty
    years old and over, to be his kinsman and next heir, but that
    Ketteringham Hall was devised to the use of his wife Jane and of
    others after her death. It is certain, moreover, that this letter
    could not have been written before the year 1495 when Sir Robert
    Clere was knighted; and that is probably the very year, as Sir
    Harry Grey was dead at least in October 1496, and most likely a
    month or two earlier.]


1062

WILLIAM PASTON TO SIR JOHN PASTON[157-1]

_To my most special good father, Ser John Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: About 1495(?)]

After most humbyl wyse of recommandacion, in my most lovyngly wyse,
I beseche yow of your dayly blyssyng, showyng yow that I am at Ser John
Fortescu place, be cause they swet so sor at Cambryge. Also I shew yow
that Mr. Thomas Clark ys desessyd, hows sowle God have mercy.

Also, I beseche yow that ye wol se a remedy for the comun of Snaylwel,
for the Bayly of Snaylwel and on of your fermors war with my tutor and
me, and sheuyd me that all the comun shuld a be takyn away butt for Mr.
Cotton and the Vecur of Fordan,[157-2] hom I beseche yow to thank. Fro
Pamsborow.[157-3]

  Be your most humbyl servaunt,

  WILLIAM PASTON.

    [Footnote 157-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Fenn says, I cannot tell
    on what grounds, that this letter must have been written between
    1491 and 1495. At the earlier of these dates the writer could not
    have been more than twelve years old, but as lads were sent to the
    university at a much earlier age in those days than in ours, even
    the earlier of these dates is not impossible. The style of the
    letter, however, is not boyish, and I should have been inclined to
    place it a year or two later even than Fenn’s latest date, but
    that there is no clear evidence to go by. The sweating sickness
    was prevalent in England at different times during the reign of
    Henry VII.; and there is no particular record of its visiting
    Cambridge.]

    [Footnote 157-2: Fordham in Cambridgeshire, north of Newmarket.
    Snailwell lies between.]

    [Footnote 157-3: Punsborne, near Hatfield, in Hertfordshire.]


1063

MARGARET, COUNTESS OF RICHMOND, TO ----[158-1]

BY THE KYNGES MODER.

[Sidenote: Between 1497 and 1503]

Trusty and right welbeloved, we greet you well. And wher by the meanes
of our trusty and right welbeloved Sir Reynold Bray, Sir Thomas Lovell,
and Sir Henry Heydon, Knights, there was a full agreement made and
concluded, and also put in writinge, betwen our trusty and right
welbeloved Sir John Savile, Knight, and Gilbert Talbot, Esquier, on
th’one partie, and yow on th’other, for divers lands which they ought to
have in the right of their wives, daughters and heyers to William
Paston, Esquier, their late fader deceassed, which lands ye by mighty
power kepe and withholde from them without any just title, as they
afferme; and albeit the said agrement was made by your minde and
consent, yet ye ne doe performe the same, to our merveile, if it be so.
Wherefore we desier and also counsell yow without delay upon the sight
hereof now shortly to ride to the court to the said arbitrators, now
ther being, with whom ye shall finde your adverse partie, or other in
their names fully authorized, to abide such final ende and conclusion in
the premisses as shall be consonant with the said agrement, without
further troubles or busines therin hereafter to be had; and that ye will
thus do in any wise, so as we be not driven (through your defalte) to
put to our hands for further remedye to be had in the premisses.

Yeven under our signet at our manner of Colly Weston, the x^th day of
February.

    [Footnote 158-1: [From Sandford’s _Paston Genealogy_.] William
    Paston, the uncle of the two Sir Johns, died in 1496, and this
    letter must have been written either in the year following or
    between that date and 1503, when Sir Reginald Bray died. William
    Paston’s will, which will be found in the Appendix, was dated 7th
    September 1496, and proved on the 28th November following. He
    married Anne Beaufort, daughter of Edmond, Duke of Somerset, and
    was therefore uncle to the writer of this letter, Margaret,
    Countess of Richmond, the mother of King Henry VII. The person to
    whom the letter is addressed is not named, but it is not unlikely
    to have been Sir John Paston the second.]


1064

ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF NORFOLK, TO SIR JOHN PASTON[159-1]

_To my right welbeloved frende, Sire John Paston, Knyght._

ELIZABETH, DUCHES OF NORFFOLK.

[Sidenote: 1497(?) / FEB. 28]

I commaunde me to you, thankyng you as hartely as I can for your labour
and substancyall serching owte of Thomas Martynz matyr, preing you of
contenuance, and of your best advyse therin, how he shall breke the
mater so as, by your helpe and wysdam, a frendely comunycacion may be
hadde, so as the mater may be had in examynacion by suche gentylmen as
shalbe named by th’assent of bothe parties, suche as tendyr and love the
wele of bothe parties, and also the pees and tranquyllyte of the cuntre,
and love to eschewe variaunce and parties in the cuntre, wherin ye shall
not only do a greete pleasure to me, but a grete dede of charyte for the
profight and ease of both parties, and also a pleasure to God, Who have
you in keping.

At Erle Soham lodge, this xxviij. day of February.

  N. E. N.

    [Footnote 159-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] It seems probable that
    this letter was written in the February following Sir Harry Grey’s
    death. (_See_ No. 1061.)]


1065

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON AND ANOTHER[160-1]

_To my right trusty and right welbel[oved Sir] John Paston, Knyght, and
Sir . . . . . Knyght, . . . . of them._

[Sidenote: 1499 / AUG. 20]

Right trusty and welbeloved councellours, I comaunde me to you. And
where the Kinges Grace is lately acerteinyed that Th’Erl of Suffolk is
departid owt of this his Realme, Hys Grace hath commaundid me to wryte
unto you that ye incontynent uppon the sight of this my writing
endeovour you to enquyre aswell of such persones as be departid over
with the seid Erle as of theim that accompanyed hym in his repayre to
the see, and retornyd ageyn, or in any wyse were prevy to the same, and
theruppon, in as goodly hast as ye kan, to put them and every of them in
suertie savely to be kept, and therof t’acerteyn me, to th’entent ye
maye knowe his ffurther pleasure in the same. And if ye shall at any
tyme herafter perceyve any suspect person nyghe unto the see costes
which shall seme unto you to be of the same affynyte, than His Grace
will that ye put them in lyke suertie. And Almighti God have you in His
keping.

Written at Gaddishill, in the Ile of Wight, the xx^ti daye of August.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 160-1: [Douce MS. 393, f. 87.] Edmund de la Pole, Earl
    of Suffolk, escaped abroad on the 1st July 1499, and proclamations
    were issued on the 20th August following (the day on which this
    letter was written) against persons leaving the kingdom without a
    license. (_See_ my _Letters and Papers Illustrative of the Reigns
    of Richard III. and Henry VII._, vol. i. preface p. xl., vol. ii.
    p. 377.) It appears that the King was at this time staying at
    Godshill, in the Isle of Wight, the place from which this letter
    is dated (see _Excerpta Historica_, p. 122).]


1066

HENRY VII. TO SIR JOHN PASTON[161-1]

_To our trusty and welbeloved knight, Sir John Paston._

BY THE KINGE.

[Sidenote: 1500 / MARCH 20]

Trusty and welbeloved, we grete yow well, letting yow wete that our
derest cousins, the Kinge and Queene of Spaine, have signified unto us
by their sundry letters that the right excellent Princesse, the Lady
Katherine, ther daughter, shal be transported from the parties of Spaine
aforesaid to this our Realme, about the moneth of Maye next comeinge,
for the solempnization of matrimony betweene our deerest sonne the
Prince and the said Princesse. Wherfore we, consideringe that it is
right fittinge and necessarye, as well for the honor of us as for the
lawde and praise of our said Realme, to have the said Princesse
honourably received at her arriveall, have appointed yow to be one
amonge others to yeve attendance for the receivinge of the said
Princesse; willinge and desiringe yow to prepare yourselfe for that
intent, and so to continue in redynesse upon an houres warninge, till
that by our other letters we shall advertise yow of the day and time of
her arrivall, and where ye shall yeve your said attendance; and not to
fayle therin, as ye tender our pleasure, the honor of yourselfe, and of
this our foresaid Realme.

Yeven under our signet at our manner of Richmount, the xx^ty day of
Marche.

    [Footnote 161-1: [From the _Paston Genealogy_, compiled by
    Sandford, and printed by Mr. Worship, in the _Norfolk
    Archæology_.] Catherine of Arragon was expected in England in the
    spring of the year 1500, although she did not actually arrive till
    October 1501, owing to some alteration of plans.]


1067

RICHARD CALLE TO SIR JOHN PASTON[162-1]

_To the right reverent and honurable, my master, Sir John Paston,
Knyght._

[Sidenote: Before 1503]

Plesitht it your mastership to remembre, I shewyd onto you in Lente that
I had bought Baktons place. Sir, it is so that John Bakton graunted to
John Trovy hes sone in lawe, hes mese with all the londes and tenements,
&c., takyng of the seide John Trovy viij. marke of annuyte yerly, terme
of hes lyf; wherupon endenture were made and a state delyverd. Upon the
weche I bargeyned with Trovy, payng to hym for hes parte c. marke and
x., wherof he hadde in hande iiij_li._ vj_s._ viij_d._ and xv_li._
xiij_s._ iiij_d._ shulde be payd at such tyme as I had a lawfull astate,
weche was apoynted before Michelmes last past; weche is not yet done.
Wherfore he hath forfeted an obligacion of xl_li._ that he was bounde in
to me for the same astate; ther was no defaute in me, for my money was
there redy. And, sir, in the same weke after your mastership departed
out of this contre, Bakton and the seide Trovy come to Bakton, and sent
for me, and there were we appoynted for the same bargeyn and accorded,
wenynge to me and to all tho that were there it had ben fully
concl[uded] . . . . . my suertes and for all other thynges. And sodenly
Bakton departed hem be the avice of [the Prior of Bro]mholme, and John
Bowle and other, weche meved Bakton that I shulde not have my bargein;
and so they entende to putte me from my bergein. And master Fitzlawes,
Kn[i]ght, of Esex, hath sent me a letter, weche I sende you closed
herin; and at hes enstaunce I have graunted Trovy an ende for vj_li._
and my iiij_li._ vj_s._ viij_d._, and my costes that I have done on the
place, weche with these mony and costes drawith xij_li._ If I may have
all thes money payd onto me within xiiij. dayes after Cristemas, I wol
take non avauntage of the obligacion, weche Trovy is bounde to me.
I suppose Mr. Lawes woll speke to you of thes mater. I beseche you that
ye wol be goode master to me herin, for I am lothe to be putte from my
bergein. I am in suerte there is no man wol geve so moche for it as I
wolde, and they nede not to fere them of ther payment, for I ofer them
iiij. suertes, the worste of them is worthe all the lande; yet Bakton
mystrustes me, and nede not. If I had it, I wolde truste to make it a
goode thynge, for ther is moche thynge ther by that myght be had in to
it, weche causeth me to be the more desirous to it. I shewe your
mastership the previte of my mynde, trustynge ye wolbe good mastre to
me, and I shal pray to God for you and for all youres.

Wreten at Felmyngham, the Saterday next before Sein Marteyn.

  Be your servaunt,

  R. CALLE.

    [Footnote 162-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] From the mention of
    ‘Master Fitzlewes, Knight of Essex,’ I am inclined to think this
    letter must be of the reign of Henry VII., and addressed to the
    later Sir John. Sir Lewis Fitzlewes of West Horndon, in Essex, was
    attainted as a Lancastrian in 1471, but the manor was restored to
    his son, Sir Richard, by Henry VII., who presented to the living
    from 1494 to 1519. The letter, however, must of course be earlier
    than 1503, the year in which Sir John Paston died.]


1068

ABSTRACT[163-1]

[RICHARD CALLE] TO [SIR JOHN PASTON?]

[Sidenote: Year uncertain]

Reminds him that four or five years ago he received from the writer
‘certain wainscoat’ and certain fish for his household, a hogshead of
wine, spars, ‘clapholt,’ etc. in full discharge of all former debts.
Will always be ready to repay what his correspondent has paid for him to
the King. Received of him a millstone, price £3, for which Calle gave a
ryall in earnest, and delivered 1 quarter cod to Philip Loveday. I am
grateful for the pains taken by ‘your mastership’ on my account, etc.

  [The handwriting of this letter seems to be that of Richard Calle,
  but much older looking than that of most of his letters. As there is
  no distinct evidence of date, we place it after another letter of
  his, which seems to be late.]

    [Footnote 163-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


1069

SIR JOHN KENDAL TO SIR JOHN PASTON[164-1]

_To the right worshipful and my right entierly welbeloved cosin and
frende, Sir John Paston, Knight._

[Sidenote: Before 1503]

Right worshipfull sir, I recommaunde me unto you. I wryte this
onely unto you, to advise you that I was mynded that my cousin
Clippesby,[164-2] berer herof, shuld wele have maryed here in thies
partes, wherin your nyce[164-3] toke hevy conceyte, thinking in hir
mynde, that I was not willing that my said cousin shulde marye with hir.

At that tyme I knewe not what love was bitwix them, but now I undrestand
that bothe there myndes is to mary to geders; wherunto on my parte, I am
agreble and wel content, desiring and praying you to be the same, and to
be the better frende unto them at this my prayer and instaunce. And what
pleasir as I may doo unto you in thies partes shal be redye, in that I
may, at your desires. And I pray you to recommaunde me to my cousin your
nyce. And Jesu preserve you.

Writen at London, the first day of Juyn.

  Your own, the Priour of Saint Johns,

  SIR JOHN KENDAL.

    [Footnote 164-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] Sir John Kendal was
    Prior of St. John’s from 1491 to 1501, and probably later, so that
    there is nothing clearly to fix the date of this letter, except
    that it was written before the death of Sir John Paston in 1503.]

    [Footnote 164-2: John Clippesby, Esq. of Oby.]

    [Footnote 164-3: Constance, daughter of William Paston, Sir John’s
    brother.]


1070

MARGARET, COUNTESS OF OXFORD, TO SIR JOHN PASTON[165-1]

_To my right trusty and hertely wilbilovede sone, Sir John Paston,
Knyght._

[Sidenote: Year uncertain]

Right trusty and hertely wilbiloved sone, I recommennde me to you, and
send you Godes blyssynge and myn. And where oon John Malpas my olde
servaunt, brynger herof, hath purchacede a writt directede to you and
othre Justices of Peace in the shires of Norffolk and Suffolk, and also
to the Sheryff of the same, for to put hym in pessible possescion in
such certayn landes of his, accordynge to the Kynges writt; I pray you
therefor hertely, and of my blyssynge charche you that at this my pour
request and desir ye wole pute you in your faythfull devoir with othere
Justaces associete with you, to see the execuscion doon and performyede
accordynge to the saide writt. And Almyghty God evere more preserve you,
my nown dere sone.

Writene in my lordes castell of Hethyngham, the xv. day of January.

  MARGRET OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 165-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] I see nothing certain
    about the date of this letter, except that it must have been
    addressed to the later Sir John Paston (for in his brother’s time
    the Earl of Oxford was an exile, and his Countess Margaret in
    needy circumstances), so that the date must lie between 1488 and
    1503. For what reason the Countess calls Sir John her son I cannot
    explain.]

  [[my nown dere sone.
  _spacing unchanged_]]


1071

SIR JOHN PASTON TO WILLIAM PASTON AND RICHARD LIGHTFOOTE[166-1]

_To my brother William Paston and my cosyn Richard Lightfoote, and to
iche of theym._

[Sidenote: 1503]

Mastyrs bothe, I recomand me to yow, and send yow closid herin a booke
of the seying of dyvers folkis, whiche testyfiee ayenst Thomas Rutty and
other. I prey yow shewe it to my lordys[166-2] good lordshepe, and that
I may know hys plesur ferther in as hasty wyse as may be, that I may
ordre me ther aftyr. I had gret labore to come by the woman that was in
servyse with Rutty, whiche sie [_saw_] all ther conversacyons many
yeris. She is now in servyse with Richard Calle. And I have Thomas Bange
in prison at Norwyche with the Shrevys of Norwych. The woman seythe he
is as bold a theffe as eny is in Ingland; but he wyll nowghte confesse,
nor I handelyd hym not sore to cause hym to confesse. But and Ruty knewe
that he and the woman be in hold, and hathe told talis, I thynke it wyll
cause Rutty to shewe the pleynesse.

Clerk and Roger Heron are endightid at this sessyons at Norwyche, last
holdyn on Twysday last past, for robbing of the pardoner; and so is
Rotty and all his felawshepe that the woman hathe apechid. According to
hir apechement, Raff Taylour is over the see; Robert Fenne is dede; John
Baker and William Taylour ar yett untakyn. If my lord send for T. Bange
or the woman, some of my lordis servauntes had need to come for theym;
for I can not do in the cause for lake of men and horse, for my wyff
ridith this next week in to Kente, to the wydow, hir doughtir Leghe.

And as for Ramesey, liek a prowde, lewde, obstynat foole, he wyll not
come befor my brothe[r] Sir R. Clere, nor me, but he seythe he wyll be
with my lord hastyly, and shewe hys mynde to his lordshepe, whiche I
beleve not. The substancyall marchantys of Norwyche hathe shewid ther
myndys to my brother Sir R. Clere and me that he entendith to William
Bayly gret wronge in his reknynges.

    [Footnote 166-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter is
    anonymous, but is in the handwriting of Sir John Paston, the
    younger of that name. From the mention of his wife and ‘the widow,
    her daughter Leghe,’ it was evidently written not during the life
    of Margery Brews, his first wife, who must have died about the
    year 1495, but after his marriage to another. This second wife was
    Agnes, daughter of Nicholas Morley, Esq., of the well-known family
    at Glynd, in Sussex, and had already been twice married before her
    marriage with Sir John. Her first husband was John Hervey, Esq. of
    Thurleigh, Beds, Usher of the Chamber to King Edward IV. Her
    second was John Isley of Sundridge, Kent. By the former she had a
    daughter, Isabel, married to John Leghe or Alyghe, Esq. of
    Addington, Surrey, who proved his father-in-law’s will in 1494.
    She herself survived her own third husband, Sir John Paston, and
    died in 1510. Her will, in which she calls herself ‘Dame Agnes
    Paston,’ is at the principal registry at Somerset House, dated the
    31st May in that year, and proved on the 19th June following. For
    these particulars I was indebted to the genealogical researches of
    the late Colonel Chester, and _Notes and Queries_, 5th S. ix. 326,
    370, 414, 512.]

    [Footnote 166-2: The Earl of Oxford.]


1072

THE EARL OF OXFORD TO SIR JOHN PASTON[167-1]

_To the right worshipfull and my right entierly welbelovyd Sir John
Paston, Knyght._

[Sidenote: After 1503?]

Right worshipfull and right intierly belovyd, I commaund me hartely to
you. And where as your broder William, my servaunte, ys so troubelid
with sekenes and crasid in his mynde, that I may not kepe hym aboute me,
wherfor I am right sory, and at this tyme sende hym to you, prayng
especially that he may be kepte surely and tendirly with you, to suche
tyme as God fortune hym to be bettyr assurid of hym selfe and his myndes
more sadly disposid, whiche I pray God may be in shorte tyme, and
preserve you longe in gode prosperite.

Writen at my place in London, the xxvj. day of Juyn.

  OXYNFORD.

    [Footnote 167-1: [From Douce MS. 393, f. 86.] This letter is
    probably later in date than the last, as it would appear that when
    the last was written, William Paston was still in the Earl of
    Oxford’s service.]


1073

THE EARL OF OXFORD’S STEWARD TO THE ‘BLACK KNIGHT’[168-1]

_Sinescallus Comitis Oxoniæ Nigro Militi._

  Non decet Sinescallo tam magni Comitis
    Ut Comes Oxoniæ verbis in Anglicis
  Scrittere epistolas, vel suis in nuncijs
    Aliquid proponere si non in Latinis.

  Igitur ille pauperculus prædicti Comitis
    Magnus Sinescallus magni Comitatis
  Nuncupatur Norff. Latinis in verbis
    Apud Knapton in curia in forma Judicis.

  Tibi nigro militi salutem, et omnibus
    Notifico, quod Langdon ille homunculus
  Nullam pecuniam liberare vult gentibus,
    Quod est magnum impedimentum nostris operibus.

  Idcirco tibi mando sub pœna contemptus,
    Quod tu indilate proprijs manubus
  Scribas tuas lettras, quod ille homunculus
    Copiam pecuniæ deliberet gentibus.

  Sin autem per littras has nostras patentes
    Ego et operarij, qui sunt consentientes
  Omnes una voce promemus suos dentes
    Nisi liberet pecuniam, cum simus egentes.

  Teste meipso apud Knapton prædicta,
    Est et michi testis Maria Benedicta,
  Quod vicesimo die Julij non inde relicta
    Erat summa solidi, res hæc non est ficta.

    [Footnote 168-1: [From Fenn, iv. 458.] The ‘Black Knight,’ to whom
    this facetious doggrel was addressed, seems to me to have been
    most probably the later Sir John Paston, whose services the Earl
    of Oxford, as the reader is aware, continually made use of. The
    manor of Knapton came to John, 12th Earl of Oxford, who died in
    1462, by his marriage with Elizabeth, grand-daughter of Sir John
    Howard.]


1074

EAST BECKHAM[169-1]

[Sidenote: 1503 / FEB. 6]

Where Sir John Paston and Roger Townesende have agreed and promysed to
obey as we, Jamys Hobart and John Yaxley will devyse for the varians of
the maner of Estbekham: We devyse and a warde that Sir John Paston shall
have the seid maner to hym, and to his heires; and he therfor shall paye
to the seid Rogyr xl_li._ at Pentecoste nexte, and at Halowmesse nexte
aftyr that xl_li._, and at Pentecoste next aftyr that xx_li._; and the
same Syr John shall have the arrerages of the seid maner. And if the
seid Sir John refuse to have the maner, then the seid Rogyr to have the
same maner, with the arrerages as is a forseid, payeng to the seid Sir
John the seid C_li._ at the dayes aforseid; and the seid Syr John to
geve answer which he will chose the viij. daye of this moneth.

Yevyn the vj. daye of Februarii, anno R. R. H. vij. xviij^o.

And all this to be perfurmyd and put in surte after our avise. And we
devise that he that shall have the land, shall paie to th’ other at
Halwemes come twelvemonyth, ten mark, besides the seid C_li._, because
th’arrerages have ben long in the tenauntes handes.

  JOHN YAXLEE.

  JAMYS HOBART.

    [Footnote 169-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


1075

ARCHBISHOP WARHAM TO WILLIAM PASTON[170-1]

_To my cousyn Master William Paston._

[Sidenote: 1503 / SEPT. 6]

Cousyn Paston, I recommaunde me unto you, and have received your letter,
by the which I have undrestand of the deth of my cousyn your fadre,
whose soule Jesu assoile. I wol counsaile and exhorte you to take it as
wel and as paciently as ye can, seeyng that we al be mortal and borne to
dey. And where as ye desire to have a letter _ad colligendum_, after
myne advise ye shal doo wel to be here with me at Michaelmas next
commyng, and at your then commyng I shalbe glad to doo you the best
confort and helpe that I can; counsailing that ye in the meane tyme doo
not entremedyll in any wise with th’admynystring of any parte of your
faders goodes, nor with the receiving of his debtes, for divers causes,
as at your comyng hudre ye shal knowe more.

The meane season, loke that ye be of as confortable chere as ye can,
exhorting my lady, your modre in lawe,[170-2] to be in like wise, to
whom I pray you to have me recommendyd. Thus fare ye hertily wel.

From London, the vj^th day of Septembre.

  Your,

  WILLIAM, ELECTE OF LONDON.

    [Footnote 170-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] The writer of this
    letter was William Warham, who was first Bishop of London, and
    afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury. According to the signature,
    he was Bishop-elect of London at the time it was written, but we
    are persuaded that it is a slip of the pen. He was elected Bishop
    of London in 1502, and was consecrated on the 5th October; but it
    is clear from the preceding No. that Sir John Paston was alive as
    late as the beginning of February 1503. In the year 1503, however,
    Warham was translated to Canterbury. The bull for his translation
    was issued on the 29th November 1503, but doubtless he was elected
    some time before; and it is quite intelligible how, being actually
    Bishop of London, he should have written ‘Elect of London’ in
    place of ‘Elect of Canterbury.’ Moreover, the allusion to the
    business of the administration agrees entirely with this
    supposition.]

    [Footnote 170-2: Agnes, widow of John Hervey, Esq. of Thurley,
    Beds, etc. _See_ p. 166, Note 1.]


1076

JOHN KENDAL TO [WILLIAM PASTON?][171-1]

[Sidenote: 1503, or later (?)]

Your pore servaunt and bedeman, John Kendale, be secheth your good and
gracious masterschepp, at the reverence of God and in the wey of
charyte, to remembre that my maister your fader, on whos soule God have
mercy, had fro me x. acres of free londe that I bout of the executours
of Nicholas Pekeryng of Filby for xx. marc paid on j. day, to pay to
executours of Edmonde Norman for purchase of ij. partes of Holm Halle,
somtyme Edmonde Norman.

Also my seide maister, your fader, had fro John Kendale the croppe of
the seide x. acres londe, sowen with barly and peson, wherof v. acres
were weel somerlayde[171-2] to the seid barly, the whiche croppe the
seide John Kendale schulde a made worth to hym iiij_li._ xiij_s._
iiij_d._, althow ther had be but xx. quarteres barly growyng on viij.
acres and half of londe, that is to seyn up on an acre ij. quarter,
iiij. busshelz, and the half acre in avayle, besyde j. acre and an half
of peson, for the seide John Kendale solde his malt at Ormesby mad of
the barly growyng the same yer that the foreseid croppe was taken fro
hym, for iiij_s._ viij_d._ a quartere; and so he myght a solde the same
and meche more if he had had it.

Also my seid maister, your fader, hath caused the foreseid John Kendale
to a foreborne the ferme of the seide x. acres of londe be the space of
ix. yer, be the yer xvj_s._ & viij_d._, that is, the ferme of j. acre
xx_d._, wherof the somme conteyneth vij_li._ x_s._ beside j. yer
receyved of Hagh.[172-1]

    [Footnote 171-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] If this petition was
    addressed to any member of the Paston family, I should think it
    must have been William Paston, the son of the later Sir John. That
    would make the date at least as late as the year 1503, when his
    father died. If it was either of the two Sir Johns, ‘my master
    your father’ would be John Paston, Esquire, who died in 1466. But
    Nicholas Pickering of Filby is said to have been buried in the
    steeple of Filby church in the year 1466, and it is evident that
    ‘my master your father’ survived him more than nine years.

    Edmund Norman, whose executors are here spoken of, died as far
    back as 1444. Blomefield says he was seised of two parts of the
    manor of Filby, but does not mention him as being also owner of
    two parts of Holm Hale. The two parts of Filby were afterwards
    held in trust by Sir John Fastolf; but William Pickering and
    Cecily, his wife, were lords of the whole manor and settled it on
    John Paston, who released it to Nicholas Pickering in
    1450.--Blomefield, xi. 218, 221.]

    [Footnote 171-2: Kept fallow for some time previous to sowing.]

    [Footnote 172-1: Here the MS. ends abruptly.]


1077

ABSTRACT[172-2]

[Sidenote: 1504 / DEC. 10]

Receipt given by Thomas Bradbury, alderman of London, to William Paston,
Esq. of Norfolk, 10th Dec. 1504, for £5 in full payment of half a
year’s rent.

    [Footnote 172-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]


1078

WILLIAM MAKEFYRR TO DARCY AND ALYNGTON[172-3]

_To the ryght worschypfull Master Roger Darsy and Master Gylys Alyngton,
beyng at the Jeorge, in Lumberd Strett, be thys delyveryd in hast._

[Sidenote: 1506 / JAN. 17]

Ryght worschypfull masters, I recomend me un to you, certyfying you that
the Kynges Grace and the Kyng of Castyle mett this day at thre of the
cloke, apon Cleworth Greyn, ij. mylle owt of Wyndesower, and ther the
Kyng reseyvyd hym in the goodlyest maner that ever I sawe, and ech of
them enbracyd oder in armys.

To schew you the Kynges aparell of Yngland, thus it was:--hys hors of
bay, trappyd with nedyll warke; a gown of purpuyr velvyt, a cheyn with a
joerge of dyamondes, and a hood of purpuyr velvyt, whych he put not of
at the mettyng of the seyd Kyng of Castylle; hys hatt and hys bonett he
avalyd, and the Kyng of Castylle in cas lyke. And the Kyng of Castyll
rod apon [a] sorellyd hoby, whych the Kyng gave un to hym; hys apparell
was all blak, a gown of blak velvytt, a blak hood, a blak hatt, and hys
hors harnes of blake velvytt.

To schew you of the Kynges company, my Lord Harry of Stafforth[173-1]
rod in a gown of cloth of tuyssew, tukkyd, furryd with sabulles, a hatt
of goldsmyth worke, and full of stons, dyamondes, and rubys, rydyng apon
a sorellyd courser bardyd with a bayrd of goldsmythes wark, with rosys
and draguns red.

And my Lord Markas[173-2] rydyng apon a bald sorelyd hors, with a deyp
trapper full of long tassels of gold of Venys, and apon the crowper of
hys hors a whytt fedyr, with a cott apon hys bak, the body goldsmyths
wark, the slevys of cremysyne velvyt, with letters of gold.

My Lord of Kent[173-3] apon a sorelyd hors, bald, the harnes of Venys
gold, with a deyp frynges of half zerd of lengh. My Lord of Kent cott
was on barr of cloth of gold, an oder of cremysyn velvyt, pyrlyd with a
demy manche cut of by the elbowe. Thyes be the lords that bare the
bruyt.

Sir Hew Waghan apon a bay hors trappyd with cremysyn velvyt full of gylt
bels, a gown of blak velvyt, and a cheyn of gold, bawdryk wys, worth v.
hondreth pownd.

Thys be the sperys: Master Sant John apon a blak hors, with harnes of
cloth of gold with tasselles of plunkytt and whytt, a cott of plunkytt
and whytt, the body of goldsmyths werk, the s[l]evys full of spanguls.

John Carr and William Parr cotts lyke, the horsys gray, of Parr trappyd
with cremysyn velvyt with tasselles of gold, and bels gylt. Carr hors
bay with an Almayn harnes of sylver, an ynch brod of betyn sylver, both
the cottes of goldsmythes wark the bodys, the slevys on stryp of
syllver, the oder gylt.

Edward Nevell apon a gray hors trappyd with blak velveyt full of small
belles, hys cott the on half of greyn velvyt, the oder of whytt cloth of
gold; thyse to the rutters of the spers, with oder dyvers well appontyd.

On the Kyng of Castylles party, the Lord Chamberlayn cheyff, I can not
tell hys name as yett; hys apparell was sad, and so was all the resydeu
of hys company with clokes of sad tawnye blake, gardyd, sum with velvyt
and sum with sarsnyt, not passyng a dosyn in nowmber. It is sayd ther is
many by hynd, wych cums with the Queyn of Castyll, wych schall cum apon
Teyusday.

When the Kyng rod forth to Wyndesouer Castyle, the Kyng rode apon the
ryght hand the Kynges of Castylle, how be it the Kynges Grace offeryd
hym to take hym apon the ryght hand, the whych he refussyd. And at the
lyghtyng the Kyng of Castylle was of hys hors a good space or owr Kyng
was a lyght; and then the Kynges Grace offeryd to take hym by the arm,
the whych he wold not, bot toke the Kyng by the arme, and so went to the
Kynges of Castylle chamber, whych is the rychestly hangyd that ever I
sawe; vij. chambers to geder hangyd with cloth of arras wroght with gold
as thyk as cowd be; and as for iij. beds of astate, no kyng Crystyned
can schew sych iij.

Thys is as fer as I can schew you of this day, and when I can know mor,
ye schall have knowlege.

From Wyndesouer this Saterday, at v. of the cloke.

  By yours,

  WILLIAM MAKEFYRR.

    [Footnote 172-3: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] This letter gives an
    account of the meeting of Henry VII. and Philip, King of Castile,
    near Windsor, during the time when the latter was detained in
    England in the beginning of the year 1506. It is well known how
    after setting out from the Low Countries to take possession of his
    kingdom of Castile, Philip met with a storm, and was driven to
    land on our coast, and how, on hearing of it, Henry invited him to
    visit him at his Court, where he staid for some time while the
    damage done to his fleet was being repaired.]

    [Footnote 173-1: Henry, Earl of Stafford, eldest son and heir of
    Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, who was attainted and
    beheaded in 1521.]

    [Footnote 173-2: Thomas Grey, Marquis of Dorset, was the son of
    Thomas, the late Marquis, who was the son of Elizabeth, Queen of
    Edward IV. by her first husband, Sir John Grey of Groby. This
    nobleman in the next reign became Lord of the Marches between
    England and Scotland, which he stoutly kept and boldly maintained.
    He died in 1530, 22 Hen. VIII.--F.]

    [Footnote 173-3: George Gray, Earl of Kent, was a true soldier to,
    and a favourite of Henry, and survived this pageant a very short
    time, dying within the year.--F.]

  [[Master Sant John apon a blak hors, with harnes of cloth of gold
  _text has “withh arnes”_]]


1079

AN INVENTORY[175-1]

  James Gloys, j. dongge,[175-2]
    iij_s._

  Item, a coverlete,
    v_s._

  Item, ij. blankettes,
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, ij. pare of shettes,
    x_s._

  Item, a sellore,[175-3]
    xij_d._

  Item, a rosour,
    viij_d._

  Item, v. shertes,
    viij_s._

  Item, j. roset cape,
    iiij_d._

  Item, iiij. gownes,
    xxvj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, a curt baron,
    xl_d._

  Item, iij. gyrdylles,
    vj_d._

  Item, iij. payre of hossen,
    vj_s._

  Item, j. song boke, pris
    xx_d._

  Item, j. dowbelet of fustian,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, j. grene cotte,
    ij_s._

  Item, ij. payre schone,
    xiiij_d._

  Item, j. box with j. porse of cloth of gold,
    xl_d._

  Item, j. crosse silver,
    xl_d._

  Item, j. sawtere,
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, j. premere,
    ij_s._

  Item, j. boke of statutis,
    xl_d._

  Item, j. boke of _vitas Patrum_,
    ij_s._

  Item, j. purs in the bedstraw with
    xx_s._

  Item, j. boke of xij. chapetyrs of Lynccoln, and a boke of
  safistre,[175-4]
    x_s._

  Item, vj. steyned paperis,
    xij_d._

  Item, ij. scochenes,
    viij_d._

  Item, a swerd, pris
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, a towayle,
    x_d._

  Item, a _supersedyas_ of Gloys, Osborn and Snallewell.

  Item, a bleu gown of William Tavernerys,
    x_s._

  Item, a blake cloke,
    vj_s._

  Item, a bottell for wine of a potell,
    xij_d._

  Item, a peyre of tabille of horne and box,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a confessionall,
    ij_s._


  Herre Boll, a dongge,
    xl_d._

  Item, a traunsom,
    ij_s._

  Item, a paire of schettis,
    iiij_s._

  Item, a blanket,
    iij_s._

  Item, a coverlet,
    ij_s._

  Item, a pillow of down,
    xij_d._

  Item, ij. curteynes,
    ij_s._

  Item, gownes,
    x_s._

  Item, a dowblet of fostian,
    xl_d._

  Item, iij. schertes,
    v_s._

  Item, a towayle,
    viij_d._

  Item, a blake hod,
    ij_s._

  Item, ij. cofforys stuffet,
    ij_s._

  Unde, j. was sprwys chyst with,
    xx_s._

  Item, j. clasp of sylver,
    xij_d._

  Item, of payse money,
    xij_d._

  Item, ix. ferthynges,
    ij_d. ob._

  Item, a lytyll chyst,
    vj_d._

  Item, ij. pors with,
    ij_s._ vij_d. ob._

  Item, iiij. rynges,
    iij_s._

  Item, a box with bedys, qwere of ij. payre of jett, with
  Paternosterys of corall,
    xl_d._

  Item, a poyre of jett, pris
    xij_d._

  Item, v. payre of box,
    x_d._

  Item, a payre of ambre,
    xviij_d._

  Item, a purs of welwet,
    viij_d._

  Item, iij. payre of knyffes,
    x_d._

  Item, a payr of hernishede knyffes,
    xij_d._

  Item, v. napettes,
    v_d._

  Item, iij. hedkercheffes, pris
    xij_d._

  Item, a box with sylke and perryll,
    iij_s._

  Item, a powche of rosset damaske,
    xx_d._

  Item, a payre of gold weghtes in a case,
    ij_s._

  Item, a broch of sylver with a crown,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a payre of beddes of segamore,
    iiij_d._

  Item, a box of tene with sylver wire.

  Item, iij. new gyrdyll, pris
    ix_d._


  Item, in the second coffer was bokes, pris
    xvj_d._

  Item, a boke of Seynt Thomas de _Veritatibus_, pris
    x_s._

  Item, a red boke with Hugucio and Papie,
    xx_s._

  Item, iij. bokes of soffistre,
    xx_d._

  Item, maney other smale bokes,
    x_s._

  Item, iij. cappis,
    x_d._

  Item, a surplice,
    xl_d._

  Item, iij. letterys of pardon,
    x_s._

  Item, a stevynyd[177-1] clothe, a crucifix,
    xx_d._

  Item, a payre of dowbyll glovys, furredde with lambe,
    vj_d._

  Item, ij. payr of hosson,
    v_s._

  Item, a combe of veveri,[177-2]
    vj_d._


  John Osborn, a cott of rosset, pris
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a stomaucher of a zerd of gode new hollond clothe,
    x_d._

  Item, iiij. payre of sokkes, pris
    viij_d._

  Item, ij. payre of lyncloys,
    viij_d._

  Item, ij. payre of hossen,
    iiij_s._

  Item, a payre of schone,
    vij_d._

  Item, a payre schettes,
    iiij_s._

  Item, iij. gyrdyll,
    ix_d._


  Jamus Halmon, iiij. schettes,
    x_s._

  Item, ij. schertis and a quarter of lynclothe,
    ij_s._ vj_d._

  Item, a pelow bere,
    vj_d._

  Item, ij. payre of sockes,
    iij_d._

  Item, a gown furret with blake lom,
    x_s._

  Item, a payre of cremessen hossen,
    iij_s._

  Item, a payre spores, a pare of glovis,
    xvj_d._

  Item, iij. gyrdyll,
    ix_d._

  Item, a stomaker of lenclothe,
    viij_d._

  Item, a payre of shone,
    vij_d._

  Item, staffe, pris
    iiij_d._

  Item, a sakke,
    viij_d._


  Syngleton, a payr of bottes and a parre of sporis,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a sadyll, a paytrell and a brydoll and ij. gerthis,
    x_s._

  Item, a payre of dowbelet slevys of blake, }
  Item, a payre of slevys of rosset,         }
    iij_s._

  Item, a payr of stokes of fustian,
    [viij_d._][178-1]

  Item, a pare of schone,
    vij_d._

  Item, a schyrt,
    xx_d._

  Item, a purs with
    ij_s._

  Item, a gyrdyll, a payre of patanys,
    iiij_d._

  Item, a dagar knyffe, pris
    iiij_d._


  Katryn Wilton, a donge,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a coverlet,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a blanket,
    iij_s._

  Item, a payr of shettes,
    iiij_s._

  Item, a pelow of doun,
    xij_d._

  Item, a payre of new hosson,
    viij_d._

  Item, a gown and a kertyll,
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, a cors harnesshet with blake, pris
    xx_d._

  Item, a hod,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a kercher of lawn, pris
    xx_d._

  Item, ij. kercher of therd,
    xij_d._

  Item, a payre off bedys of ambre,
    xx_d._

  Item, a new canvasse.


  Jane Belton, a blanket,
    iij_s._ iiij_d._

  Item, a shette,
    ij_s._

  Item, a kerchey therd, and ther in was vj_s._ viij_d._ of gold.

  Item, a payre of beydys of jette with Patter nosteris of corall, pris
    xx_d._

  Item, a payre of turnerys of lawn,
    xx_d._

  Item, a yerd of lynclothe,
    viij_d._

  Item, a payre of hossen,
    viij_d._

  Item, a smoke,
    xx_d._

  Item, a kercher of thred,
    viij_d._


  Symond Houston, a payre of bottes, a payre of sporis,
    iiij_s._


  Purrey, a blw gown,
    viij_s._

  Item, a bridull and a feterloke,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a payr of hossen, a payr of schon,
    ij_s._ vij_d._

  Item, a pare of furred glovys.


  Frere John Alderiche, ij. quaris of prayeris. Item, a powtenere with
  a payre of bedys of jette. Item, a scapelerey with an hodde,
    vj_s._ viij_d._


  John Keduray, a payre of lynclothys, j. gown of blw,
    vj_s._ viij_d._

  Item, a payre of hossen,
    xx_d._

  Item, a payre of schone,
    vij_d._

  Item, a payre of glovys and a hatt,
    xij_d._


  Simond Sadiller, a payre of sporis,
    xij_d._

  Item, a knyff hernyshid with sylver,
    xij_d._


  Robert Fen, a gown,
    vj_s._

  Item, a cappe,
    iiij_d._

  Item, a peyre of hossen,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a chart (?), pris
    xvj_d._


  Richard Charlys, a peyr of hossen,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a dager,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a gyrdyll,
    ij_d._

  Item, a cappe of rosset,
    iiij_d._


  Jhon Faster, a horne,
    viij_d._


  John Judde, a chert, pris
    xvj_d._

  Item, a peyr of bedys of jett,
    viij_d._


  William Bemond, a custell, pris
    xvj_d._

  Item, a perre of bottes, pris
    ij_s._

  Item, a peyre of glovys of otter.


  Water Wynter, a shert,
    xij_d._

  A dager,
    xij_d._

  A purs with
    x_d._


  Sander Koke, a mourey gown,
    vj_s._

  Item, a cotte of moster develers,[180-1]
    xl_d._

  Item, a blanket,
    iij_s._

  Item, a peyre of shettes,
    iiij_s._

  Item, iij. peyr of shoys,
    xx_d._

  Item, a peyr of sokkes,
    ij_d._

  Item, a hatt,
    xij_d._

  Item, a peyr of patanys, a cappe of violet,     }
  Item, iij. gyrdyll, and a cerchey [_kerchief_], }
    xij_d._

  Item, ij. of[180-2] of hossen, pris
    iij_s._


  Snallewell, a schet, pris
    xx_d._

  Item, ij. shurtes, a peyr ofe lynclothis,
    xx_d._

  Item, ij. dowbelettes, pris
    xl_d._

  Item, iij. gyrdyll, ij. cappes,
    xv_d._

  Item, ij. peyr of hossen,
    xl_d._

  Item, a lyneng to a gown,
    xx_d._

  Item, an hodde,
    xl_d._


  John Bube (?), ane hatt, pris
    x_d._

  Item, a bowe, pris
    vj_d._

  Item, a peyr of bottes,
    xvj_d._

  Item, a purs with
    iiij_d._

  Item, a cappe,
    iiij_d._


  Herry Gunnold, tablys and stolys, pris
    v_s._

    [Footnote 175-1: [From Add. Charter 17,255, B.M.] This inventory
    might perhaps have been inserted in the year 1474, after the death
    of James Gloys, with whose name it begins. (_See_ No. 857.) The
    year in which it was drawn up is, however, by no means certain, as
    the articles seem to have belonged to many different owners; and
    it may be conveniently referred to here at the end of our
    collection.]

    [Footnote 175-2: A mattress.]

    [Footnote 175-3: A bed canopy.]

    [Footnote 175-4: Sophistry, _i.e._ dialectics.]

    [Footnote 177-1: Parti-coloured.]

    [Footnote 177-2: Ivory.]

    [Footnote 178-1: Struck through with the pen.]

    [Footnote 180-1: Grey woollen cloth.]

    [Footnote 180-2: So in MS.]

  [[Item, a swerd, pris
  Item, a poyre of jett, pris
  _text has “pris,” for both_

  Item, a pelow bere, / vj_a._
  _italic “d” misprinted as “a”_]]


1080

WYKES’S BILL[181-1]

_Towardis my Lord of Oxford._

  In primis at Brentwode for horsmete,
    ij_d._


_Chelmesford_

  Item for our dyner there,
    iiij_d. ob._

  Item for horsmete there,
    ij_d._


_Brambtre_

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._

  Item for drynke there,
    _ob._


_Hydyngham_

  Item for oure soper there,
    iiij_d._

  Item for horsmete there,
    iiij_d._

  Item for wayshyng of my shert and botes,
    i_d. ob._


_Laneham_

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._


_Hadlegh_

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._

  Item for brede and drynke there,
    j_d._


_Taderston_

  Item for horsmete there,
    ij_d. ob._

  Item for Williamis dyner there,
    ij_d._


_Coylchestere_

  Item for horsmete there,
    ix_d._

  Item for the sadelere,
    iij_d._

  Item payd to the smyth,
    vij_d._

  Item for brede and drynke there,
    ij_d._


_Wytham_

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._

  Item for brede and drynke there,
    j_d. ob._


_Chelmesford_

  Item for oure dyner there,
    iiij_d._

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._


_Brentwode_

  Item for horsmete there,
    j_d._

  Item for brede and drynke there,
    j_d. ob._

  Item for a dosyn poyntis,
    ij_d._

    Summa expens,
        v_s._

  _Endorsed_: Wykes.

    [Footnote 181-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 231.] This bill of
    travelling expenses cannot be assigned to any particular year; but
    it would seem to be of the reign of Henry VII.]

  [[Item for horsmete there, / j_d._
  _Brentwode_
  Item for horsmete there, / j_d._
  _italic “d” misprinted as “a” (three consecutive lines)_]]




1081

T. BALKEY TO JOHN PASTON[183-1]

_To his ryght wurshipfull maister, John Paston, Esquier, this byll be
delyverid in hast._

[Sidenote: Date uncertain]

Ryght wurshipfull and myne especyall good maister, I comaund me vonto
your good maistership. Sir, it is so that there hath ben a gret rumour
and mervelous noyse of yower departyng ffro Yermoth; for summe seid that
ye were departed in a Duch ship and some seid in aspaynessh ship and
some seid in yower ship, and some seid ayein your wyll ye were departed;
of wych departyng my lord Steward hadde knowleche and comaunded a noon
after your old servaunt Rychard Fitzwater to ryde to Norwich, and so to
Yermoth, to knowe the trowth. And at Norwich I spoke with your seid
servaunt, and ther he shewed vonto me that my lord hadde send another of
his servauntis vonto my Lord of Oxynford to shew vonto his lordship of
your departyng, &c., and fferthermore he shewed vonto me prevyly that my
Lord hath imagyned and purposed many grevous thyngis ayens your
Maistership; for wych cawse he shewed wnto me that in any wyse your
mastership shuld not come that wey, and I shall shewe your maistership
moch more at your comyng, with the grace of God, whoo ever preserve your
good maistership. At Norwich the Sonday next after Sent Marke.

  Your servaunt,

  T. BALKEY.

    [Footnote 183-1: [Add. MS. 33,597, f. 10.] There is nothing in the
    rest of the Paston correspondence to throw any light upon this
    letter, either as to the date at which it was written, or as to
    the person addressed, whether it be John Paston the eldest or the
    younger of the two Johns, his sons.]


1082

ANONYMOUS TO MASTER PASTON[184-1]

Maister Paston, it is so that my Lord desireth to have his lyverey as
for this yere to be of the colour that he hadde him self a demye gowne
of, and his childern hadde of the same ayenst Cristmasse laste was;
I wot never whether ye remembre it or nay. Yt was a medelled tawney, som
what rede, and it was bought at Watkyn Stalworthes. I pray you assaye
among the clothe makers in your countre howe a man may bye a cloth of
them. Ye muste remembre the gentilmen muste have better than the yomen,
and the yomen better than the gromes. And ye knowe well that ye and I
the laste yere pourvoied my lord of the gentilmenes lyverey and the
yomens for iij_s._ a yerde, one with a nother, and the gromes for ij_s._
viij_d._, and boughte all at the drapers in London. Wherfore my Lord
woll thinke to be served of better clothe and lesse price at the clothe
makers. I wolde have sente you an example but I can not gette it.

    [Footnote 184-1: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 148.] This letter contains a
    great many uncertainties. The writer is anonymous, the person
    addressed is by no means clear, and the lord referred to cannot be
    determined. Neither is there any means of arriving at an
    approximate date.]


1083

ROBERT KYLLYGREWE TO RICHARD WASSE[184-2]

_Thys letter be delyvyrde on to my fadyrynlav Rychard Wasse dewelly yn
the parris of Morton._

Welle belovyd fadyr, y recommende me on to you, and y thonke you of your
gode cherre to me beyng vyt you laste, &c. Fadyr, hyt ysso asfor the
promysse that ys by twyxt you and me, y hope to God to contayne you of
my promysse. So by that y am so lenge on y payde on to you, Fadyr, hyt
ysso ye have y lefte me yn so grete a danger wyt the reparasyon of
Wolston ande wythe Benet Barnarde that y am so lenge byhynde vyt you of
my promys; nere the les y have sende you by Herry Penennec iiij. mark a
fore Crystmas, ande the wederyng fyl so fowle a konnot go on to you.
Fadyr, hyt yesso y have payde Benet Barnarde viij. marke for the fe that
ye made on to hym, and more y moste pay hym for you, for he axyt of you
yn holle xij_li._ wyt the fe, ande hys labor that a dyde for you yn
London. For he sayt that ye nevyr payde hym of no fyne, nodyr for no
odyr coste that a dyde for you wylle ye werre yn thys contray. Therfore
y pray you to sende on to me a dyscharge for the sayde xij_li._, or
ellys a wolle dystrayne me and put me to scharge an coste as a hath
strayne my tenenttes byfore for thys mater and costys. For dermore
Boryng hath take an accion yn the comyn law ayenst us bothe, entendyng
to dryve us to a new particion, for a shewyth owre to tenentes to tempe
ande meve them to cry fore a noder particion, ande to have suche as
plesyth hym to hys reteyne; and therfore, but we have the better
consayle hyt woll cost moch mony wyth owt dowt. Ther fore send me suche
evydens as may dyscharge and save bothe you and me, wyche byth yn your
hon dysposal; hyt hath coste me xl_s._ for the accion that he hath take
ayenst Tomas Snel and Wyllyam Snell, for bycause that T. Snell
forbede[185-1] Bouryng ys tenents fro my wode yn Boter towne, which
bythe alders. Your doctor [_daughter_] recommende hyr on to you and
prayyt of your dayly blessyng, and sche hat a son, bleste by God. Namore
to you at thys tymme. God have you yn Hys kepyng.

  By your Son,

  ROBERTE KYLLY GREWE.

    [Footnote 184-2: [Add. MS. 34,889, f. 181.] It is difficult to
    connect this letter with the rest of the Paston correspondence, or
    to give any idea as to its date.]

    [Footnote 185-1: ‘forbede’ repeated in MS.]


1084

MEMORANDUM[186-1]

  Memorandum to speke with William Byrde be the same tokne, I came
  home from London to Norwich on Mydsomer evyn last past, and the same
  even I cam home to his howse, and brought hym x_s._ for a gyrdyll
  off myn that he had in his kepyng for a plegge off myn; and if so be
  that he wilnat ley out thes money, let hym send me the bill indentyd
  off my jowellys closyd in a letter with a signet off myn that my
  wiff hath in her keping.

  _Endorsed_--Vyall.

    [Footnote 186-1: [From Paston MSS., B.M.] I cannot tell by whom
    this memorandum was drawn up, nor do I know to what it refers. But
    as the MS. appears to belong to the Paston collection, and is of
    the period, I have not thought it right to omit it. The name
    ‘Vyall’ which is written on the back of the paper occurs in No.
    756.]


1085-8

ABSTRACTS[186-2]

The following letters are probably all of the time of Henry VII. They
are all addressed to a Mr. William Paston, but perhaps not all to the
same person. The first two are apparently to William Paston, the brother
of the two Sir Johns. The third is doubtful. The last may be to the son
of the second Sir John.

  1085.--John Wryght to Master William Paston at Hynnyngham.--Has
  received from him a bill with 3_s._ 6_d._, part payment of the
  cotton russet. ‘The rest we shall drink when ye come to London.’
  Does not understand Paston’s order for other 9 yards. Does he wish
  frieze, cotton or plain blanket?--London, St. Catherine’s Even.

  1086.--John Breton of Hadley to Master William Paston.--Desires him
  to be good master to the bearer, ‘a poor kinsman of mine,’ to whom
  my lord[186-3] has written sharply, that he may come before my lord
  for his answer.

  1087.--Petyr Marham to his master, William Paston.--Desires his
  advice, as Robert Gaunley, sometime his ’prentice, has taken an
  action against him at the common law.

  1088.--William Ocley to Master William Paston.--Has spoken with
  young Wyndam in Master Digby’s presence. He was grateful to Paston
  for his loving mind towards him, and said he would receive ‘the two
  riall’ himself, and buy no new gear till he knew the King’s pleasure
  touching his pardon.--London, 3 Sept.

    [Footnote 186-2: [From Paston MSS., B.M.]]

    [Footnote 186-3: The Earl of Oxford.]


NOTE TO NO. 1016.

  As stated in the footnote at p. 101, since the above document was in
  type the Editor came upon a complete copy of this list of knights
  made at the battle of Stoke, which, being also more accurate than
  that in Leland’s _Collectanea_, is here printed in full. It is
  apparently the original MS. of which No. 1016 is a mutilated copy,
  and is written on two flyleaves of the copy of Caxton’s _Game and
  Play of Chess_ in the King’s Library in the British Museum.


_The names of the banerettes made at the batell of Stooke by syde
Newerke apon Trent, the xvj. day of June the ij^de yer of Harry the
vij._

  Sir Gilbert Talbott.
  Sir John Cheny.
  Sir William Stoner.


_Thes iij. wer made by fore the bataile, and after the bataile wer made
the same day_:--

  Sir John of Arundell.
  Sir Thomas Cookesay.
  Sir John Forteskew.
  Sir Edmond Benyngfeld.
  Sir James Blount.
  Sir Ric’ of Croffte.
  Sir Humfrey Stanley.
  Sir Ric’ Delaber.
  Sir John Mortymer.
  Sir William Troutbeke.


_Knyghtys made at the same bataile_:--

  Sir ----[187-1] Audeley, son and heyre of the Lord Audeley.
  Sir Edward Norys.
  Sir Robert Clyfford.
  Sir George Hopton.
  Sir Robert of Broughton.
  Sir John Paston.
  Sir Thomas Lovell.
  Sir Humfrey Savage.
  Sir Harry Wyloughby.
  Sir John Sabacotys.
  Sir William Vampage.
  Sir Antony Browne.
  Sir Ric’ Poole.
  Sir Thomas Terell.
  Sir Ric’ Lews.
  Sir Thomas Grey.
  Sir Nycholas Vaux.
  Sir Edwarde of Borough.
  Sir William Tyrwytt.
  Sir Ameas Paullett.
  Sir William Troutebeke.
  Sir Raff Langforthe.
  Sir James Haryngton.
  Sir Harry Boulde.
  Sir ----[187-2] Devenyshe.
  Sir William Redmyll.
  Sir Gregory Lovell.
  Sir Thomas Blount.
  Sir Robert Cheyny.
  Sir William Carew.
  Sir John Wyndam.
  Sir Roger Belyngam.
  Sir John a Mosgrave.
  Sir George Nevyll the bas[tard] of the Tour.[187-3]
  Sir Robert Ratcleff.
  Sir James Parker.
  Sir Edward Darell.
  Sir Edward Pykeryng.
  Sir Thomas of Wolton.
  Sir William Sandys.
  Sir Robert Brandon.
  Sir Thomas a Poole.
  Sir Morys Barkeley.
  Sir Rauffe Shyrley.
  Sir John Longvyll.
  Sir William Litylton.
  Sir William Norys of Lancas . . .
  Sir John Dygby.
  Sir Thomas Hansard.
  Sir Christofre Wroughton.
  Sir Thomas Lyne.
  Sir Morys a Barow.

    [Footnote 187-1: Blank in MS. Leland supplies the name as Sir
    James.]

    [Footnote 187-2: Blank in MS. ‘John’ in Leland.]

    [Footnote 187-3: ‘The bastard of the Tour’ looks as if it had been
    added by the same hand at a later date.]




APPENDIX


WILLS

From the Principal Registry of the Court of Probate at Somerset House,
and from the Diocesan Registers at Norwich. For the Memoranda of the
latter I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Jessopp.


1

CLEMENT PASTON[188-1]

WILL OF ‘CLEMENS PASTON DE PASTON, sanæ mentis,’ etc.

(no style of Armiger or any other designation), A.D. 1419, June.

[Sidenote: 1419 / JUNE]

Leaves his soul to God, St. Margaret, and All Saints; his body to be
buried in the parish church of St. Margaret at Paston, between the north
door and the tomb of his wife Beatrix.

Legacies--(1) To the High Altar (sum not named); (2) To the Vicar of
Paston for tithes, etc., 3_s._ 4_d._; (3) For the lights ‘Beatæ
Margaretæ in cancella . . . coram ymagine Beatæ Margaretæ, vj _li._
cer.’; (4) ‘Item, luminibus super le Rodelofte ejusdem ecclesiæ, xij
_d._’; (5) For the reparation, etc. of the church, 3_s._ 4_d._; (6) To
the Vicar of Bakton (as above), 2_s._; (7) For the repair, etc. of the
Trunch church, 8_d._; (8) For the repair of Monslee church, 6_d._;
(9) ‘Item, Priori et Conventui de Bromholm, vj_s._ viij_d._’

The residue to Martha, ‘quæ fuit uxor Johannis Bakton, sorori meæ, et
Willelmo Paston, filio meo,’ that they may pay his debts, make
restitution for any wrongs done, and expend the rest in works of charity
and piety for the good of his own soul, that of Beatrix, his wife, the
souls of his deceased parents and benefactors, ‘et animabus fidelium
defunctorum.’

Witnesses--‘Nich’o Priori de Bromholm, Rich. Jernemuth Monacho, Rich.
Vicario Ecclesiæ de Paston prædicta, Johanne Kyng, capellano, Roberto
Gynne, et aliis.’

Proved at Norwich, ‘2 Oct. An. Dom. supradicto.’

    [Footnote 188-1: [Reg. Dioces. Norvic., Hyrning, f. 51, b.]]

  [[Legacies--
  vj _li._ ... xij _d._
  _anomalous spaces in original_

  ‘Item, Priori et Conventui de Bromholm, vj_s._ viij_d._’
  _missing close quote_]]


2

WILLIAM PASTON, THE JUDGE[189-1]

I.--[_Testament._]

[Sidenote: 1444 / JAN. 10]

In Dei nomine Amen. Ego, Willelmus Paston de Paston, sanæ mentis et
memoriæ, condo testamentum meum in hunc modum. In primis, lego animam
meam Omnipotenti Deo, Beatæ Mariæ, et omnibus Sanctis, et corpus meum
sepeliendum ad finem Australem altaris in Capella Beatæ Mariæ in fine
Orientali ecclesiæ Cathedralis Sanctæ Trinitatis, Norwici. Et si
contingat corpus meum ibidem sepeliri, lego cuilibet monacho sacerdoti
ecclesiæ prædictæ qui singulis diebus aliqua septimana per septem annos
proximo sequentes post mortem meam missam de Spiritu Sancto in capella
prædicta tempore celebrationis summæ missæ in eadem ecclesia
decantaverit, ad exorandum in eadem missa de Spiritu Sancto, et in aliis
divinis per ipsum diebus illis factis, pro anima mea et animabus uxoris
meæ, patrum, matrum et omnium consanguineorum et benefactorum nostrorum,
et omnium quorum debitores sumus, et omnium per nos injuriam patientium,
et eorum omnium pro quibus Deo est deprecandum et omnium fidelium
defunctorum septem de nac’ (?). Item, lego Roberto nunc priori ecclesiæ
Sancti Andreæ de Bromholm quadraginta solidos; et cuilibet monacho
ejusdem ecclesiæ conventus de Bromholm sex solidos et octo denarios; et
executoribus testamenti Ricardi Causton, nuper vicarii ecclesiæ de
Paston, viginti solidos; et executoribus testamenti Adæ, nuper vicarii
ecclesiæ de Bakton, sex solidos et octo denarios; ita quod remittant et
relaxent in conscientiis suis animabus prædictis si quæ per earum
aliquam sibi debita fuerint. Et si hoc remittere et relaxare
recusaverint, de prædictis legatis nihil habeant, sed in omnibus quæ
sibi per animas prædictas vel earum aliquam deberi rationabiliter aut
evidenter, in conscientia vel aliter, juxta discretionem executorum
meorum, aut majoris partis eorundem, probaverint aut verificaverint,
sibi satisfaciant executores mei. Residuum vero bonorum meorum omnium
non legatorum do et lego Agneti uxori meæ, Johanni filio meo, Willelmo
Bakton et Johanni Damme de Sustede, quos ordino et constituo executores
hujus testamenti mei, ut ipsi inde disponant pro[ut] in justis
conscientiis suis magis viderint Deo placere et animabus prædictis
prodesse. In cujus rei testimonium præsentibus sigillum meum apposui.
Datum decimo die Januarii anno regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum
vicesimo secundo. Hujus autem testamenti mei venerabilem in Christo
patrem et dominum, dominum Willelmum Lincolniensem Episcopum[190-1]
ordino et constituo supervisorem.

    [Footnote 189-1: [Register Luffenam, 29.]]

    [Footnote 190-1: William Alnwick, Bishop of Lincoln from 1436 to
    1449. He had been Bishop of Norwich before he was presented to
    Lincoln.]


II.--[_Last Will_, 31 Jan. 1444.][190-2]

Universis et singulis ad quos præsens scriptum indentatum pervenerit.
Ego Willelmus Paston de Paston gratias, reverencias et honores. Cum
diversæ personæ ad usum, proficuum et denominationem mea feoffatæ sive
seisitæ existant sibi et hæredibus suis in feodo simplici in et de uno
mesuagio, uno molendino, et certis terris, tenementis redditibus et
serviciis cum pertinentiis in Paston, Bakton, Edithorp, Witton, et
Moneslee, ac in aliis villis adjacentibus in comitatu Norffolk, quæ
nuper fuerunt Clementis Paston, patris mei jam defuncti, cujus animæ
propitietur Deus; ac de certis terris et tenementis, parcellis manerii
vocati Latymers, remanentibus ultra et præter alia terras et tenementa
parcellas dicti manerii nomine meo adiu[190-3] est dat’ Priori et
conventui ecclesiæ Sancti Andreæ de Bromholm et successoribus suis; quam
perquisitionem prædicti prioris dominus Rex nunc per literas suas
perdonavit; et uno tofto et uno columbari et aliis terris et tenementis
cum pertinentiis in Bakton, Paston, Edithorp, Witton, et Casewik quæ
nuper fuerunt Hugonis atte Fen de Jernemouthe; et de aliis terris et
tenementis in Paston et Bakton per prædictos priorem et conventum mihi
et aliis ad usum meum et hæredibus meis datis et concessis; et de et in
uno mesuagio et certis terris, tenementis, redditibus, et serviciis cum
pertinentiis in Estsomerton, Westsomerton, He[nnesby?], Martham,
Wynterton in Flegge, ac in aliis villis adjacentibus, et in Heigham
Porter, Veteri Bokenham et Bokenham Castell, in eodem comitatu, tam illa
quæ . . . . . . [quam] illa quæ nuper fuerunt Galfridi Somerton,
avunculi mei, videlicet fratris Beatricis, matris meæ carissimæ jam
defunctæ, quæ . . . . . . . . . . Et in et de manerio de Oxenede, ac
certis terris, tenementis et serviciis in Oxenede, Burgh, Skeyton,
Marsham . . . . . . . . . . [et in] aliis villis adjacentibus cum
pertinentiis in eodem comitatu, quæ nuper fuerunt Roberti Salle militis,
et Willelmi Clopton militis, firmarii (?) . . . . . . . sive aliquorum
vel alicujus eorum in eodem comitatu: Et in et de maneriis de
Marlyngford, Riston, Vaux, et Shipd[am] . . . . . . . . medietate
quatuor marcatarum, sive medietate unius marisci nuper Thomæ Ocam (?)
[cum pertinentiis] in eodem comitatu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
mesuagiis, ac certis terris, tenementis, redditibus et serviciis cum
pertinentiis in Estodenham et aliis v[illis] . . . . . . in eodem
comitatu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Honyngham: Et in et de uno
mesuagio ac certis terris et tenementis, redditibus et serviciis . . .
. . . in Wy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in comitatu prædicto quæ
nuper fuerunt Willelmi Thuxton, Armigeri, vocata Tolyes: Et . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ricardi Doket in
Carleton et aliis villis adjacentibus: Et in et de duobus . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . villis adjacentibus: Et in et de una pecia terræ
in Carleton vocata W . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . de manerio de Snaylwell et aliis terris et tenementis quæ
quondam fuerunt Johannis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . Ac in et de manerio de Stanstede cum
pertinentiis in comitatu Suffolk, et de Horwelbury . . . . . . . . .
continue absque aliqua conditione collusione seu covina, istis tamen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . mesuagiis,
terris, tenementis, redditibus et serviciis prædictis ultimo . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . consciencia mea, lege Dei et Angliæ
illæsa, fieri et exequi et adimpleri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . Sciatis me, præfatum Willelmum Paston, ultimam
voluntatem de præmissis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . ligenti deliberacione declarasse, fecisse et limitasse juxta
effectum verborum sequentium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . seu seisitæ et omnes aliæ personæ quas in prædictis
maneriis, terris et tenementis vel aliqua parcella eorum ad . . . . . .
. . . . . . . imposterum feoffari contigerit, hæredes et assignati sui,
quandocumque post mortem meam . . . . . . . ejus sufficiens warantum in
hac parte habentem racionabiliter requisitæ fuerint per cartas . . .
. . . dum . . . . . . . præfatæ Agneti prædicta maneria de Oxenede,
Marlyngforde, Stanstede, Horwelbury, et Sh . . . dictas pa . . . . . . .
de Latymers dictis priori et conventui minime datas, et prædicta
mesuagia, molendinum, terras et tenementa, quæ fuerunt prædicti prioris
et conventus, Roberti Salle, Willelmi Clopton, Francissæ, Clementis
Paston, Hugonis atte Fen, seu alicujus eorum, ac medietatem prædictorum
marisci et quatuor marcatorum redditus, in toto, per communem
æstimationem, ad valenciam centum librarum per annum; habenda et tenenda
eidem Agneti et assignatis suis ad totam vitam ejusdem Agnetis: Ita quod
eadem maneria de Oxenede, Marlyngforde, Stanstede et Horwelbury, et
terræ et tenementa quæ fuerunt Roberti Salle, Willelmi Clopton et
Francissæ, seu alicujus eorum, cum pertinentiis, post mortem præfatæ
Agnetis remaneant hæredibus de corpore meo et corpore prædictæ Agnetis
exeuntibus. Et prædicta manerium de Shipdene et parcella manerii de
Latymers, ac dicta mesuagia, molendinum, terræ et tenementa nuper
Clementis Paston et Hugonis atte Fen, seu alicujus eorum, cum
pertinentiis, post mortem prædictæ Agnetis, ad prædictas personas
feoffatas seu feoffandas, hæredes et assignatos suos revertantur, ad
perficiendam inde hanc ultimam voluntatem meam: Et si nullus extiterit
hæres de corpore meo et corpore prædictæ Agnetis exiens, quod tunc post
mortem ejusdem Agnetis prædictum manerium de Oxenede et dicta terræ et
tenementa nuper prædictorum Roberti Salle, Willelmi Clopton et
Francissæ, seu unius eorum, cum pertinentiis, ad prædictos feoffatos et
hæredes suos similiter revertantur, ad perficiendam inde hanc ultimam
voluntatem meam. Et quod prædicta maneria de Marlyngford, Stanstede et
Horwelbury, cum pertinentiis, remaneant rectis hæredibus Edmundi Barry
militis, patris prædictæ Agnetis, imperpetuum. Item, volo quod prædictæ
personæ, ut prædicitur, feoffatæ seu feoffandæ, hæredes seu assignati
sui, paciantur et permittant Robertum Clere, armigerum, Edmundum Clere,
armigerum, Johannem Pagrave, armigerum, Willelmum Bakton de Bakton, et
Johannem Damme de Sustede, vel duos eorum, per communem assensum eorum
quinque, prædictum manerium de Snaylwell et prædicta alia terras et
tenementa in Snaylwell, in toto, per communem estimacionem, ad valenciam
quadraginta marcarum per annum, occupare, et exitus et proficua inde
percipere et habere, a festo Sancti Michaelis proximo sequenti post
mortem meam usque Edmundus filius meus jam ætatis xviij. annorum
pervenerit ad ætatem xxj. annorum. Et quod iidem Robertus Clere,
Edmundus Clere, Johannes Pagrave, Willelmus Bakton et Johannes Damme,
seu dicti duo eorum, viginti marcas annuatim provenientes de eisdem
exitibus et proficuis, inter prædictum festum Sancti Michaelis et dictam
ætatem prædicti Edmundi, filii mei, per commune avisamentum et assensum
suum et prædictæ Agnetis, annuatim distribuant in elemosinis inter
notos, pauperes et debiles, tam hospicia tenentes quam alios qui non
vadunt mendicatum, et pro missis, sacerdotum oracionibus, et suffragiis
devotorum pauperum utriusque sexus, tam religiosorum quam aliorum,
celebrandis et fiendis, pro anima mea et prædictæ Agnetis, et animabus
patrum et matrum nostrorum, et omnium consanguineorum et benefactorum
nostrorum, et omnium quorum debitores sumus, et omnium per nos injuriam
patientium, et eorum omnium pro quibus Deo est deprecandum, et omnium
fidelium defunctorum; et de eisdem exitibus et proficuis prædicto
Edmundo, filio meo quousque ad dictam ætatem xxj. annorum pervenerit,
rationabiles victum, vestitum, apparatum et sustentationem, juxta gradus
sui exigenciam, sic quod non superbiat, inveniant, et eum tam ad artis
dialecticæ per dimidium annum, juris civilis per unum annum, ac juris
regni Angliæ postea ad sufficienciam, si fieri poterit, sub sana tutela
providenter ponant, et ipsum in eisdem continuare et residere faciant,
prout eisdem melius visum fuerit ipsum Edmundum in hac parte sapere et
intelligere et sibi in futurum prodesse; et domos, muros, ædificia, et
clausuras in eodem manerio nostro existentia rationabiliter reparari
faciant, et redditus et servicia et alia onera inde debita solvant, et
hoc quod de eisdem exitibus et proficuis ad dictum ætatem dicti Edmundi
remanserit juxta sanas conscientias suas eidem Edmundo satisfaciant
tempore quo ipse juxta hanc voluntatem meam statum de eodem manerio
receperit et habuerit. Item, volo quod prædictæ personæ, prout
prædicitur, feoffatæ seu f[eoffandæ], hæredes seu assignati sui,
paciantur et permittant prædictos Robertum Clere, Edmundum Clere,
Johannem Pagrave, Willelmum Bakton et Johannem Damme, vel duos eorum per
communem assensum eorum quinque, prædictum manerium de Beauchamp et
Hollewelhalle et dicta alia mesuagia, terras, tenementa, tofta,
clausuras, redditus et servicia, quondam Ricardi Doket, Willelmi
Thuxton, Johannis Patgris senioris, Johannis Whynne et Eustachii Rows,
seu aliquorum vel alicujus eorum, in Wymondham, Carleton, Bonnewell,
Estodenham, et aliis villis adjacentibus, per communem estimacionem ad
valenciam xxv. marcarum per annum occupare, et exitus et proficua inde
percipere et habere, a prædicto festo Sancti Michaelis usque Willelmus
filius meus, jam ætatis vij. annorum, pervenerit ad ætatem xviij.
annorum; et quod iidem Robertus Clere, Edmundus Clere, Johannes Pagrave,
Willelmus Bakton et Johannes Damme, vel dicti duo eorum, quinque marcas
annuatim provenientes de eisdem exitibus per octo annos proximo
sequentes prædictum festum Sancti Michaelis, per discretionem et
avisamentum sua et prædictæ Agnetis, annuatim distribuant inter pauperes
et debiles prædictos et [pro][193-1] missis, orationibus et suffragiis
celebrandis et . . . . . . . . . . . in forma prædicta, et de eisdem
exitibus et proficuis prædicto Willelmo filio meo usque ad dictam ætatem
xviij. annorum pervenerit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . statum et
sustentacionem juxta gradus sui exigenciam, sic quod non superbiat,
inveniant et tribuant, et . . . . . . ad scholas ponant et ibidem
continuare et residere faciant prout prædicitur de prædicto filio meo
Edmundo, et domos, muros et clausuras et ædificia in dict. . . . . et
tenementis . . . repararent, et redditus et servicia et alia onera inde
solvant, et de residue dictorum exituum et proficuorum dicto Willelmo
filio meo satisfaciant . . . . . . . . . . statum de eisdem manerio,
terris et tenementis juxta hanc voluntatem meam . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . hæredes seu
assignati sui paciantur et permittant prædictam Agnetem . . . . . . . .
prædicta mesuagia, terras [et] tenementa in Est Somerton, West Somerton,
Hennesby, Martham, et Wynterton, tam illa quæ fuerunt . . . . . . . quam
illa quæ . . . . . . . . . . . . de Reston in toto per communem
æstimacionem ad valenciam xxv. marcarum . . . . . . . . . . . .
occupare, et exitus et [proficua?] inde percipere et gaudere a prædicto
festo Sancti Michaelis usque Clemens filius meus . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . xviij. annorum; et quod eadem Agnes de eisdem exitibus et
proficuis prædicto Clementi Paston . . . . . . . . . . . . . ad dictam
ætatem xviij. annorum, et Elizabeth filiæ meæ quousque maritetur,
racionabiles victum, vestitum, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . exigenciam, sic quod non superbiant, et de eisdem exitibus
et proficuis nutriatur honeste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . filiam, prædictam Elizabetham, prout statui suo convenit, ac
inveniat et ponat prædictum Clementem, filium meum, tam ad scholas
grammaticales quam alias et cæteras erudiciones, prout prædicitur de
prædictis fratribus suis; et domos, muros, clausuras, et ædificia in
eisdem mesuagio, terris et tenementis existentia, racionabiliter
reparari faciat, et redditus et servicia et alia onera inde debita
solvat, ac annuatim quousque dictus Clemens, filius meus, ad dictam
ætatem xviij. annorum [pervenerit?][193-1] distribuat manu propria in
elemosinis, juxta discretionem suam, inter magis pauperes et debiles
creaturas, in honore Quinque principalium Vulnerum et Passionis Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, et Quinque Gaudiorum Beatæ Mariæ Virginis et Matris
ejus, pro animabus prædictis, quinque marcas; et de hoc quod de eisdem
exitibus et proficuis ad dictam ætatem prædicti Clementis, filii mei,
remanserit, satisfaciat eadem Agnes juxta sanam conscienciam suam eidem
Clementi tempore quo ipse juxta hanc voluntatem meam statum de eisdem
manerio, mesuagiis, terris, et tenementis, de prædictis personis
feoffatis sive feoffandis receperit; et quod dictæ personæ feoffatæ seu
feoffandæ, hæredes, seu assignati sui, infra xl. dies proximo sequentes
postquam ipsi post festum Sancti Michaelis proximo post mortem meam per
Johannem Paston, filium meum primogenitum, racionabiliter fuerint
requisiti, per facta sua tripartita et indentata, dimittent, liberent et
assignent prædicto Johanni Paston, jam ætatis xx. annorum et amplius,
prædictum manerium de Gresham cum pertinentiis, habendum eidem Johanni
ad totam vitam suam; Ita quod si contingat prædictum Johannem Paston
aliquem exitum vel hæredem de corpore Margaretæ nunc uxoris suæ
procreare, quod tunc idem manerium cum pertinentiis post mortem ejusdem
Johannis remaneat dictæ uxori suæ, tenendum sibi ad terminum vitæ
ejusdem uxoris. Et si prædictus Johannes Paston nullum exitum vel
hæredem de corpore dictæ uxoris suæ procreaverit, tunc immediate post
mortem ejusdem Johannis idem manerium cum pertinentiis hæredibus
masculis de corpore meo exeuntibus integre remaneat. Et si nullus fuerit
hæres masculus de corpore meo exiens, quod tunc idem manerium cum
pertinentiis integre remaneat prædictæ Agneti, uxori meæ, habendum et
tenendum eidem Agneti ad totam vitam ejusdem Agnetis; Ita quod tunc post
ejusdem Agnetis mortem idem manerium cum pertinentiis ad prædictos
donatores et hæredes suos revertatur, ad exequendum et perficiendum inde
hanc voluntatem meam. Et quod eædem personæ feoffatæ seu feoffandæ,
hæredes seu assignati sui, infra xl. dies proximo sequentes postquam
ipsi, post festum Sancti Michaelis proximo post mortem meam, et postquam
prædictus Edmundus, filius meus, fuerit ætatis xxj. annorum plenarie
completorum, racionabiliter fuerint requisitæ, per consimilia facta
dimittant, liberent et assignent prædicto Edmundo, filio meo, prædictum
manerium de Snaylwell, et prædicta terras et tenementa nuper Johannis
Langham de Snaylwell, in Snaylwell, ac dictam reversionem manerii de
Shipdene et prædictarum parcellarum manerii de Latymers, dictis priori
et conventui minime data,[194-1] ac dictorum mesuag’, molendini,
terrarum et tenementorum quæ fuerunt prædictorum prioris et conventus,
ac Clementis, patris mei, et Hugonis atte Fen, aut unius eorum, post
mortem prædictæ Agnetis, habenda et tenenda eidem Edmundo et hæredibus
masculis de corpore ipsius Edmundi exeuntibus. Et si contingat ipsum
Edmundum sine hærede masculo de corpore suo exeunte obire, quod tunc
eadem manerium, terræ, tenementa et reversio cum pertinentiis hæredibus
de corpore ejusdem Edmundi exeuntibus remaneant. Et si nullus fuerit
hæres de corpore prædicti Edmundi exiens, quod tunc eadem manerium,
terræ, tenementa et reversio remaneant hæredibus de corpore meo
exeuntibus. Et si nullus fuerit hæres de corpore meo exiens, quod tunc
prædicta reversio ad predictos donatores et hæredes suos revertatur, et
prædictum manerium de Snaylwell, terræ et tenementa, cum pertinentiis,
remaneant prædictæ Agneti ad totam vitam suam. Ita quod, post ejus
mortem, idem manerium cum pertinentiis ad prædictos donatores et hæredes
suos similiter revertatur, ad perficiendum et perimplendum hanc
voluntatem meam. Et quod eædem personæ feoffatæ seu feoffandæ, hæredes
seu assignati sui, infra xl. dies proximo sequentes post festum Sancti
Michaelis proximo post mortem meam, et postquam prædictus Willelmus
filius meus fuerit ætatis xviij. annorum plenarie completorum,
racionabiliter fuerint requisitæ, per consimilia facta dimittant,
liberent et assignent prædicto Willelmo filio meo, prædicta maneria de
Hollewelhalle et Beauchamp, et dicta mesuagia, terras et tenementa,
redditus et servicia nuper Willelmi Thuxston Armigeri, Ricardi Doket,
Eustachii Rows et Johannis Patgrys, seu unius eorum, in Estodenham,
Wymondeham, Carleton, Bonewell, et aliis villis adjacentibus, habenda et
tenenda eidem Willelmo et hæredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus. Et si
contingat ipsum Willelmum sine hærede de corpore suo exeunte obire, quod
tunc eadem maneria, terræ, tenementa, redditus et servicia, cum
pertinentiis, remaneant Clementi Paston, filio meo, et hæredibus de
corpore suo exeuntibus. Et si idem Clemens obierit sine hærede de
corpore suo exeunte, eadem maneria, terræ, tenementa, redditus et
servicia cum pertinentiis remaneant dictæ Agneti ad totam vitam suam.
Ita quod post ejus mortem eadem maneria, terræ et tenementa cum
pertinentiis ad præfatos donatores et hæredes suos revertantur, ad
implendum et perficiendum inde hanc voluntatem meam. Et quod prædictæ
personæ [feoffatæ] seu feoffandæ infra quadraginta dies proximo
sequentes post festum Sancti Michaelis postquam prædictus Clemens filius
meus post mortem meam fuerit ætatis xviij. annorum plenarie completorum
racionabiliter fuerint requisitæ per consimilia facta dimittant,
liberant et assignent prædicto Clementi filio meo prædictum manerium de
Ryston, et prædicto mesuagia, terras, tenementa, redditus et servicia
cum pertinentiis in Est Somerton, West Somerton, et aliis villis
adjacentibus et in Heigham Potter, Bokenham et Bokenham Castell, habenda
et tenenda eidem Clementi filio meo et hæredibus de corpore suo
exeuntibus. Et si contingat ipsum Clementum filium meum obire sine
hærede de corpore suo exeunte, quod tunc eadem manerium, mesuagia,
terræ, tenementa, redditus et servicia remaneant prædicto Willelmo,
filio meo et hæredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus. Et si contingat ipsum
Willelmum sine hærede de corpore suo exeunte obire, quod tunc eadem
manerium, mesuagia, terræ, tenementa, redditus et servicia cum
pertinentiis remaneant hæredibus de corpore meo exeuntibus. Et si nullus
fuerit de corpore meo exiens, quod tunc eadem manerium, mesuagia terræ
et tenementa cum pertinentiis remaneant prædictæ Agneti, tenenda sibi ad
totam vitam suam. Ita quod eadem manerium, mesuagia, terræ et tenementa,
cum pertinentiis, post mortem prædictæ Agnetis, ad prædictos donatores
et hæredes suos revertantur ad perficiendum inde hanc voluntatem meam.
Item ad amorem et favorem inter prædictos Johannem, Edmundum, Willelmum,
et Clementem filios meos et prædictam Elizabeth et præfatos hæredes
suos, eorumque mutuam caritatem hinc inde nutriendum (?) et
amplificandum, volo et ordino per præsentes quod si aliqua terræ seu
tenementa, sibi aut eorum alicui, per prædictas personas feoffatas seu
feoffandas vel eorum hæredes vel assignatos in forma prædicta per dona
et concessiones, immediate, in feodo talliato seu alio statu, per
remanere aut alio quovis modo, danda seu concedenda, versus prædictos
Johannem, Edmundum, Willelmum et Clementem, filios meos, et prædictam
Elizabeth aut hæredes suos prædictos absque culpa recuperentur, vel
aliqua inde parcella recuperetur, vel status eorum inde adnihiletur,
quod infra unum annum proximo tunc sequentem residui eorum de
porcionibus suis terrarum et tenementorum prædictorum, ut prædicitur,
sibi dandorum et concessorum, juxta ratam annui valoris earundem
portionum suarum, debitam faciant recompensacionem cæteris eorum de
quorum porcionibus dictas recuperaciones vel status adnihilaciones fieri
contigerit. Ita quod onus perdicionis in hac parte, si quod evenerit
inter ipsos juxta ratam annui valoris portionum suarum uniformis sit et
æqualis. Item, ad finem quod iste articulus præsentis voluntatis meæ
proximo præcedens per prædictos Johannem, Edmundum, Willelmum et
Clementem, filios meos, ac prædictam Elizabetham et hæredes suos
prædictos sufficiencius et plenius exequatur, et quod dicta dona et
concessiones immediate vel per remanere in feodo talliato vel alio
statu, ut prædicitur, sibi faciendo per eorum facta, feoffamenta,
cartas, scripta, vel alio modo non discontinuarentur, volo et ordino
quod prædictæ personæ feoffatæ seu feoffandæ eorum hæredes et assignati,
antequam ipsi aliquem statum de prædictis terris et tenementis aut
parcella inde prædictis Johanni, Edmundo, Willelmo et Clementi, filiis
meis, et prædictæ Elizabeth et hæredibus suis prædictis, seu eorum
alicui, faciant, per scriptum suum indentatum dent et concedant prædicto
Edmundo, filio meo, unum annuum redditum triginta librarum legalis
monetæ, habendum et percipiendum eidem Edmundo et hæredibus suis
masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus de prædicto manerio de Gresham ad
festa Paschæ et Sancti Michaelis æquis portionibus, una cum sufficienti
clausula districtionis in dicto manerio fiendæ pro non solucione ejusdem
annui redditus sub forma et condicionibus subsequentibus: videlicet,
quod prædictus annuus redditus sit et remaneat in suspenso et non
levetur, solvatur, nec percipiatur quovismodo, quousque dictus Johannes
Paston vel aliquis hæres suus masculus de corpore suo exiens aliquod
donum sive concessionem, immediate vel per remanere, in feodo talliato
vel alio statu, de manerio prædicto cum pertinentiis eidem Johanni
fiendum, per factum, feoffamentum, cartam vel scriptum, seu alio modo,
in parte vel toto, discontinuaverit seu discontinuari fecerit, vel
quousque prædictus Johannes Paston, vel aliquis hæres suus masculus de
corpore suo exiens, prædictum articulum præsentis voluntatis meæ sic
incipiendum ‘Item ad amorem et favorem,’ &c. in aliqua ex parte sua
perimplendo infregerit, non perfecerit, vel non observaverit, vel sic
tam omnibus et singulis quibus aliquod donum sive concessio, immediate
vel per remanere, in feodo talliato vel in aliquo alio statu, de
prædicto manerio cum pertinentiis dicto Johanni Paston vel alicui
hæredum de corpore suo exeuntium per prædictas personas feoffatas seu
feoffandas, hæredes seu assignatos suos, in forma prædicta fiendum per
prædictum Johannem Paston vel aliquem hæredum suorum prædictorum
discontinuatum fuerit non legitime recontinuatum, quam omnibus et
singulis annis quibus articulus prædictus præsentis voluntatis meæ sic
incipiens ‘Item ad amorem et favorem,’ &c. per prædictum Johannem Paston
vel aliquem hæredum suorum prædictorum in aliquo ex parte sua
perimplendo confractus, non tentus, aut non impletus, fuerit non debite
reformatus. Et per consimile factum suum indentatum dent et concedant
prædicto Willelmo filio meo unum annuum redditum triginta librarum
consimilis monetæ habendum et percipiendum annuatim prædicto Willelmo et
hæredibus suis de corpore suo exeuntibus a tempore quo prædictus
Johannes filius meus mortuus fuerit sine hærede masculo de
tempore[196-1] suo exeunte de prædicto manerio de Gresham cum
pertinentiis ad festa prædicta æquis portionibus, una cum sufficienti
clausula districtionis in eodem manerio fiendæ pro non solutione ejusdem
annui redditus sub forma et conditionibus sequentibus, videlicet, quod
idem annuus redditus sit et remaneat in suspenso et non levetur nec
solvatur, aut percipiatur quovismodo quousque prædictus Johannes Paston,
vel Edmundus Paston, vel aliquis hæres masculus de corpore alicujus
eorum exiens, aliquod donum sive concessionem, immediate vel per
remanere, in feodo talliato vel in alio statu, de eodem manerio cum
pertinentiis, aut parcella inde, eidem Johanni vel Edmundo fiendum, per
factum, feoffamentum, cartam, vel scriptum, seu alio modo, in parte aut
toto, discontinuaverit seu discontinuari fecerit, vel quousque aliquis
eorum prædictum articulum præsentis voluntatis meæ sic incipientum ‘Item
ad amorem et favorem,’ &c. in aliquo ex parte sua perimplendo
infregerit, non perfecerit, vel non observaverit. Et per consimile
factum suum indentatum dent et concedant prædicto Clementi, filio meo,
unum annuum redditum triginta librarum consimilis monetæ, habendum et
annuatim percipiendum prædicto Clementi, filio meo, et hæredibus de
corpore suo exeuntibus a tempore quo uterque prædictorum Johannis Paston
et Edmundus (_sic_) Paston mortuus fuerit sine hærede masculo de corpore
suo exeunte de prædicto manerio[197-1] de Gresham ad festa prædicta
æquis porcionibus, una cum clausula districtionis in forma prædicta, sub
forma et condicionibus subsequentibus, videlicet, quod idem annuus
redditus sit et remaneat in suspenso, et non levetur, solvatur nec
percipiatur quovismodo, quousque prædictus Johannes Paston, vel
prædictus Edmundus Paston, vel aliquis masculus de corpore alicujus
eorum exiens, vel prædictus Willelmus Paston, filius meus, vel aliquis
hæres de corpore suo exiens, aliquod donum sive concessionem, immediate
vel per remanere,[197-2] in feodo talliato vel alio statu, dicto Johanni
Paston, Edmundo Paston, vel Willelmo Paston, filiis meis, vel eorum
alicui fiendum per feoffamentum, cartam vel scriptum, seu alio modo, in
parte aut toto discontinuaverit, seu discontinuari fecerit, vel quousque
aliquis eorum prædictum articulum præsentis voluntatis meæ sic
incipientem ‘Item ad amorem,’ &c. in aliquo ex parte sua perimplendo
infregerit, non fecerit, vel non observaverit. Et per consimile factum
suum indentatum dent et concedant prædictæ Elizabeth unum annuum
redditum triginta librarum consimilis monetæ, habendum et percipiendum
eidem Elizabeth et hæredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus a tempore quo
uterque prædictorum Johannis et Edmundi filiorum meorum mortuus erit
sine hærede masculo de corpore suo exeunte, et uterque prædictorum
Willelmi et Clementis, filiorum meorum, mortuus fuerit sine hærede de
corpore suo exeunte de prædicto manerio de Gresham ad festa prædicta
æquis porcionibus, una cum clausula districtionis in forma prædicta,
forma et condicionibus subsequentibus, videlicet, quod idem annuus
redditus sit et remaneat in suspenso et non levetur, solvatur, nec
percipiatur quovismodo, quousque prædictus Johannes Paston aut prædictus
Edmundus Paston, vel aliquis hæres masculus de corpore alicujus eorum
exiens, vel quousque prædictus Willelmus Paston seu prædictus Clemens,
filii mei, vel aliquis hæres de corpore alicujus eorum exiens . . .
. . . sive concessionem, immediate vel per remanere, in feodo talliato
vel alio statu, dictis Johanni Paston, Edmundo Paston, Willelmo Paston,
et (?) Clementi Paston, vel alicui eorum, fiendum, per factum,
feoffamentum, cartam vel scriptum, seu alio modo, in parte aut toto
. . . . manerio . . . . . discontinuari fecerit, vel quousque aliquis
eorum prædictum articulum præsentis voluntatis meæ sic incipientem ‘Item
ad amorem,’ &c. in aliquo ex parte sua perimplendo infregerit, non
perfecerit, vel non observaverit. Item, volo quod [si?] aliquis
prædictorum Johannis, Edmundi, Willelmi, et Clementis, filiorum meorum,
ante dictam ætatem suam xviij. annorum obierit, quod tunc prædictæ
personæ feoffatæ seu feoffandæ, eorum hæredes et assignati, patiantur et
permittant prædictos Robertum Clere, Edmundum Clere, Johannem [Pagrave],
Willelmum Bakton, et Johannem Damme, vel duos eorum per communem
assensum eorum quinque, prædictam porcionem terrarum et tenementorum
prædicto sic obeunti, ut prædictum est, dandam et concedendam occupare
et exitus et proficua inde percipere et habere quousque illi qui proxime
post mortem dicti sic obeuntis juxta effectum præsentis voluntatis
dictam portionem haberet et teneret fuerit ætatis xviij. annorum plene
completorum, et tunc infra quadraginta dies proximo tunc sequentes
postquam racionabiliter fuerint requisiti, per scripta sua indentata
dimittant, liberent, et assignent eandem porcionem cum pertinentiis ipsi
qui, ut prædicitur, tunc juxta hanc voluntatem meam porcionem illam
haberet et teneret, habendam et tenendam sibi in forma prædicta. Et si
prædicti Robertus Clere, Edmundus Clere, Johannes Pagrave, Willelmus
Bakton, et Johannes Damme, vel dicti duo eorum eadem exitus et proficua
disponant et distribuant in solucione debitorum quæ me debere contingat,
et reformacione et satisfactione mesprisionum et extortionum, si quas
fecerim, et pro animabus prædictis in forma prædicta per discretionem
prædictæ Agnetis et executorum meorum. Item, volo quod prædicta
Elizabeth filia mea habeat ducentas libras legalis monetæ ad maritagium
suum si ipsa per avisamentum prædictæ Agnetis et executorum meorum
maritetur. Proviso semper quod eadem Elizabeth pari sexu et ætate in
bona et competenti consanguinitatis linea maritata sit, et per
maritagium illud habeat statum sufficientem et securum in lege sibi et
viro suo et hæredibus de corporibus suis exeuntibus, si fieri potent,
seu saltem ad totam vitam suam, in terris et tenementis valoris
quadraginta librarum per annum ad minus. Et si eadem Elizabeth antequam
maritata fuerit, obierit, quod tunc dictæ pecuniæ summa pro maritagio
ejus limitata in solucione debitorum quæ me debere contingat, et in
reformacione et satisfactione mesprisionum et extorcionum, si quas
fecerim, et pro animabus prædictis fideliter distribuatur, per
discretionem prædictæ Agnetis et executorum meorum. In cujus rei
testimonium ego præfatus Willelmus Paston præsentibus sigillum meum
apposui. Datum tricesimo primo die Januarii anno regni Regis Henrici
Sexti post Conquestum vicesimo secundo.


Probata fuerunt prædicta testamentum et ultima voluntas coram nobis,
Alexandro Prowet, decretorum inceptore, ac reverendissimi in Christo
patris et domini, domini Johannis, permissione Divina Cantuariensis
archiepiscopi commissario generali, &c., vicesimo quarto die mensis
Novembris anno Domini millesimo CCCC^mo xliiij^to et legitime
pronunciatum pro eisdem, administratioque omnium bonorum &c. honestæ
mulieri, Agneti, relictæ dicti defuncti, primitus protestanti (et
protestata fuit palam, publice et expresse, judicialiter coram nobis
quod voluit agere et petere partem sibi de jure et consuetudine in hac
parte debitam, in casu quo præfatus defunctus in testamento sive ultima
voluntate quoad æquivalenciam partis hujusmodi minime ordinavit et
disposuit), ac discretis viris Johanni, filio dicti defuncti dum vixit,
Willelmo Bakton et Johanni Damme, executoribus in eodem testamento
nominatis, sub forma protestationis dictæ Agnetis commissa extitit in
debita juris forma; ac præfati executores habent crastinum
Purificationis Beatæ Mariæ Virginis proximo futurum ad exhibendum
inventarium &c. ex præfixione nostra.

    [Footnote 190-2: [The ink in some parts of this document is so
    very much faded that about half of each line is almost or quite
    illegible.]]

    [Footnote 190-3: So in MS.]

    [Footnote 193-1: Omitted in MS.]

    [Footnote 194-1: Sic in origine.]

    [Footnote 196-1: So in MS.]

    [Footnote 197-1: _de prædicto manerio._ These words are repeated
    in the MS.]

    [Footnote 197-2: _vel per remanere_, repeated in MS.]

  [[Porter, Veteri Bokenham et Bokenham Castell
  _text unchanged: error for “Potter”?_

  per communem estimacionem
  _text reads “communen”_

  sic incipientum ‘Item ...
  _text unchanged: error for “incipientem” or “incipiendum”?_]]


3

JOHN PYRKE[199-1]

WILL OF JOHN PYRKE, RECTOR OF ST. MICHAEL AND ST. PETER’S, LONG STRATTON

[Sidenote: 1479]

Leaves to John Paston, Esquire, ‘unam cistam rubram de sp . . . . ,’ and
some other articles.

Executors, John Paston, Esquire, and William Martin of Long Stratton,
each to have for his trouble vj_s._ viij_d._

Date of will, 8 Sept. 1479. Proved 13 Nov. 1479 by John Paston alone.

    [Footnote 199-1: [Norwich Episcop. Reg., 16.]]


4

ROBERT PASTON OF WIVETON[199-2]

[Sidenote: 1482 / SEPT. 4]

In Dei nomine, Amen. Quarto die Septembris Anno Domini Millesimo
CCCC^{mo}lxxxij^o, Ego Robertus Paston de Wyveton, compos mentis et sanæ
memoriæ meæ existens, condo testamentum meum sive ultimam meam
voluntatem in hunc modum: In primis, lego animam meam Deo Omnipotenti et
Beatæ Mariæ Virgini et Omnibus Sanctis, corpusque meum sepeliendum
ubicunque Deus disposuerit. Item, lego summo altari de Weveton prædicto
pro decimis meis oblitis et male compensatis, xx_d._ Item, Gildæ Beatæ
Mariæ ibidem, xij_d._ Item, Gildæ Sancti Johannis Baptistæ ibidem,
xij_d._ Item, lumini super pelvem coram Crucifixo ibidem, viij_d._ Item,
lego lumini de _le Torchys_ ibidem, vj_d._ Item, reparacioni capellæ
Beatæ Mariæ in cimiterio ibidem, vj_d._ Item, campanis in campanili
ibidem, viij_d._ Item, reparacioni capellæ Sanctæ Trinitatis super
Pontem, vj_d._ Item, volo quod Margaretta uxor mea habeat sibi et
assignatis suis meam partem cujusdam navis vocatæ _le Gylys_, cum omni
apparatu prædictæ parti navis pertinenti et prædictam partem navis
prædicta Margareta sumptibus suis reparabit. Item, volo quod prædicta
Margareta uxor mea habeat ad terminam vitæ suæ messuagium meum cum
omnibus pertinentiis, commoditatibus, utensilibus, et necessariis
prædicto messuagio concernentibus; et post decessum prædictæ Margaretæ
volo ut prædictum messuagium meum vendetur, et de pecunia inde
proveniente volo quod Alicia filia mea ad conjugium semen habeat v.
marcas: Et si contingat quod prædicta Alicia obiret antequam conjuncta
fuerit, tunc volo quod prædictas marcas executores disponant in operibus
caritatis in ecclesia Wyveton prædicto . . . . . . . . . . . . Item,
volo cum residua pecuniæ de prædicto messuagio provenientis . . . . .
. . . ad celebrandum in ecclesia de Weveton prædicta pro anima mea et
anima dictæ Margaretæ [&c.] . . . . . . . . Et requiro in nomine Jesu
feoffatos meos ut ipsi faciant legitimum statum ei vel eis qui
messuagium prædictum adquirere voluerit aut voluerint sine
contradictione sive impedimento aliquibus. Item, lego Willelmo
Wynterton, iij_s._ iiij_d._ Item, lego negoti meo [_no name_] unam
togam, unam deploidam, unum par caligarum ad disposicionem Margaretæ
uxoris meæ.--The rest of his goods to be disposed of by his executors at
their discretion for the good of his soul.

Executors--his wife Margaret and Edmund Shotery, clerk.

Proved at Cley, 9 Oct. 1482.

    [Footnote 199-2: [Norwich Archdeaconry Reg., vol. i. f. 29, b.] [I
    do not know whether this Robert Paston was at all nearly related
    to the family, whose correspondence is contained in these volumes;
    but this will and the will of his wife Margaret, which follows,
    are interesting in themselves, and deserve a place, even on
    account of the testator’s surname.]]


5

MARGARET PASTON[200-1]

[Sidenote: 1484]

In Dei nomine, Amen. Ego, Margareta Paston de Weveton, vidua, bonæ
memoriæ existens die Lune xx. post Dominicam in Albis[200-2] anno Domini
nostri 1484^to, condo testamentum meum ac ultimam voluntatem in hunc
modum. In primis, lego et commendo animam meam Deo Omnipotenti,
Redemptori meo, Beatæ Mariæ Virgini, et Omnibus Sanctis celestis curiæ,
corpusque meum sepeliendum in cimiterio ecclesiæ Beatæ [_no name_] de
Weveton prædicta, cujus summo altari lego pro decimis meis non solutis,
xx_d._ Item, lego fraternitati Gildæ Sancti Joannis Baptistæ unum pannum
le drapre. Item, lego pictuis (_sic_) porticæ ejusdem ecclesiæ, xiij_s._
iv_d._, quæ summa remanet in manibus Johannis Andrews. Item, lego
emendacioni ecclesiæ prædictæ, iij_s._ iv_d._ Item, reparacioni
campanarum ibidem, vj_d._ Item, lego lumini Altaris, iiij_d._ Item,
lumini _le Torchys_, vj_d._ Item, lego reparacioni capellæ Beatæ Mariæ
ibidem, vj_d._ Item, lego fraternitati Beatæ Mariæ de Salthous, xx_d._,
et Summo Altari ibidem, xij_d._ Item, reparacioni campanarum ibidem,
iiij_d._ Item, lumini Aratrub’m (?), iv_d._ Item, volo quod messuagium
meum cum omnibus terris dicto messuagio pertinentibus vendatur per meos
executores, et summa pecuniæ inde (_sic_) dispensatur per eosdem in
celebratione missarum per bonum presbyterum scolarem celebratorem in
ecclesia Beatæ Mariæ de Weveton prædicta pro anima mea et animabus
omnium parentum et benefactorum meorum. Item, lego Aliciæ Bastard
quinque marcas de dicto messuagio receptas. Et si contigerit ipsum
Aliciam discedere ab hac luce, tunc volo quod Alicia filia mea habeat
inde 33_s._ 4_d._, et residuum remaneat executoribus meis. Item, volo
quod feoffati mei deliberent totam seisinam et possessionem de et in
messuagio prædicto, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis [_blot_] qui requisiti
fuerint per executores meos. Residuum omnium bonorum meorum non
legatorum do et lego et concedo meis executoribus ut ipsi ordinent et
disponant pro salute animæ meæ et animabus benefactorum meorum, prout
melius Deo Omnipotenti placeat, quos ordino et constituo Edmundum
Shortere, clericum et Johannem Say meos executores et legitimos
attornatos. In cujus rei testimonium præsentibus sigillum apposui.

Proved at Cley, 14 June, anno prædicto.

    [Footnote 200-1: [Norwich Archdeaconry Reg., vol. i. f. 76, a.]]

    [Footnote 200-2: So in MS., but the date would be more
    intelligible without the numeral ‘xx.’ _Dominica in Albis_ means
    sometimes Whitsunday, sometimes the Sunday after Easter. The
    Monday following would in the one case be 7 June, in the other 19
    April, in 1484.]

  [[corpusque meum sepeliendum
  _text reads “corpus quemeum”_]]


6

DAME ELIZABETH BROWNE[201-1]

[Sidenote: 1487 / MAY 18]

In Dei nomine, Amen. The xviijth’ day of the moneth of May in the yere
of Our Lord God m^{l}cccclxxxvij. and in the secund yere of the reign of
King Henry the vij. I, Dame Elisabeth late wife of Sir George Brown,
Knyght, being of hoole mynde and in good memorye, thanked be Allmyghty
God, make and ordeign this my present testament and last will yn maner
and forme folowing, that is to say:--


First. I bequeith my soul to Allmyghty God, Our Lady Saint Mary and to
all the Holy Company of Hevon; and my body to be buried withyn the
churche of the Blak Freris within Ludgate with my forsaid housband Sir
George; to the whiche place I bequeith xxj_li._ for my said housbandes
soul and myne, our fadres and modres soules and for all Cristen soules
to be praid for. And for xiij. trentalles of Saint Gregory to be said
and songyn for us and thaym by the freris of the said place, as in
diriges and masses with all other observaunces belonging to the same, in
maner and forme folowing; That is to wete, in the day or morow after my
discesse vij. trentallis; and every weke folowing unto my monthes mynde
oon trentall, and iij. trentalles at my monthes mynde biside the
solempne dirige and masse that is to be requyred for me at that tyme.
And I charge myne executours to see that the premisses be done and
performed, and also the said freris to feche me from the place where I
die unto thair said place where I have lymyted afore to be buried. Also,
I wull that as sone as my body is buryed and th’expenses therof done and
paid that myn executours provide and see that my dettes be contented and
paid. Also, I bequeith to the vicar of the church of Dorking in the
county of Surrey for my forsaid housbandes soul and myne, our faders and
modres, and for all the soules that we be bound unto, to be praid for
within the yer after my discesse, as in diriges and masses to be said or
song by hym or his deputie and to have us specially in remembraunce in
thayr memento by oon hole yer, xx_s._ Also, I bequeith to the reparacion
of the forsaid churche of Dorking xx_s._ Also, I bequeith to the parson
of Saint Albans in Wodstrete within London for diriges and masses to be
said or song by hym or his deputie, in like wise as the vicar of Dorking
is charged, as is afore rehersed, xx_s._ Also, I bequeith to the
reparacion of the stepull of the said churche of Saint Albane xx.
solidos. Also, I bequeith to the prisoners of Newgate and Ludgate,
Kinges Bench and Marshallsee, to every of those places to be praid for,
xx_d._ Also, I bequeith to bedred folkes and other pour householders,
aswell men as women, dwelling within London and without in the suburbis
of the same, and moste specially souche as have knowen me and I thaym,
xl_s._, as by the discrecions and advises of myne executours it shall be
thought best to be done. Moreover I geve and biqueith to my doughter
Mary, to the promocion of her mariage, all my plate and other juelles,
with all myne hole apparell, and all my stuff of houshold being within
my dwelling place or any other within the citee of London or suburbes of
the same, that is to say:--First, a standing cupp of silver gilt, chaced
with plompes, weyeng with the cover, knoppe and devise xlij. unces _et
dimidium_. Item, a standing cupp of silver and gilt, chaced with
flowres, weying with the cover, the knopp and devise, xxvij. unces _et
dimidium_. A playn standing cupp of silver gilt, weing with the cover,
the knopp and the devise xxx. unces. A standing cupp of silver and gilt,
chaced with half plompes, weying with the cover, knopp and devise xx.
unces and _dimidium_. A playn standing cupp of silver gilt weying with
cover and the knoppe and the devyse xxvij. unces and an half. A standyng
cuppe of silver and gilt, weyng with the cover, the knoppe and the
devyse xxvj. unces. A saltseler of sylver and gilte, weyng with the
cover, the knoppe and the devyse xxiij. unces. A saltseler of sylver and
gilt, without a cover, weying xxij. unces and an halfe. A litill
saltseler of sylver and gilt, weying with the cover and the knoppe and
the devyse xv. unces and an half. A litell saltseler of sylver and gilt,
without the cover, weying viij. unces and an halfe. And vij. bolles of
sylver, parcelles gilt, weying iiij.^xx. xviij. unces. And ij. peces of
sylver with a cover weying xlviij. unces. A dosen and a half of silver
sponys weying xxiij. unces, and iij. sponys of silver and gilt weying
iij. unces and iij. quartrons, and a long spone of sylver and gilt for
ginger, weying j. unce and iij. quartrons. Item, a chafing disshe of
sylver weying xxvj. unces. And ij. litell crewettes of sylver, weying
viij. unces. A chalese of sylver and gilt with the paten, weying xj.
unces. An haly water stok of silver with the lid, handill, and
spryngill, weying xij. unces. An Agnus with a baleys iij. saphires, iij.
perlys with an image of Saint Antony apon it. And a tablet with the
Salutacion of Our Lady, and the iij. Kingis of Collayn. A bee with a
grete pearl. A dyamond, an emerawde, iij. grete perlys hanging apon the
same. A nother bee with a grete perle, with an emerawde and a saphire,
weying ij. unces iij. quarters. A pece of the Holy Crosse, crossewise
made, bordured with silver aboute; iij. brode girdilles, oone of tawny
silke with bokill a pendaunt, another of purpill with bokyll and
pendaunt, and the iij^de. of purpill damaske with bokell and pendaunt.
And vj. barres of silver and gilt, and iij. brode harnysed girdilles,
oone white tisshew, another red tysshew gold, and the iij^de a playne
grene coorse. A muskeball of gold weying halfe an unce, and ij. bokilles
and ij. pendauntes of gold, oone playne and the other pounsyd, weying an
unce and a quarter. And a harnysed girdill enameled with rowsclare,
weying halfe an unce. A dymysoynt[203-1] with a rubye and an amatyste
weying j. unce and an halfe. An harnysed girdill of golde of damaske
with a long pendaunt, and a bokill of golde chekkyd, weying j. unce. A
grete bed of a state of verdure, and a counterpoynt to the same. And
iiij. curteyns of grene tartron. A grete federbed, a bolster, and vj.
fetherbeddys over woren, vj. bolsters. And iiij. mattarasses, lytyll
over woren, xij. pellowes of downe, v. newe carpettys of ij. ellys in
lengeth and yarde and halfe brode, iij. fyne pelow beres, and a grete
counterpoynt of tapstery werk of v. yardes and a quarter longe and iiij.
yardes brode. A hanging for a chamber of grene say borduryd with acrons
of xxxv. yerdes longe; a whyte spervyour; ij. counterpoyntes, an hanging
bed, with a lyon thereupon; and the valence white, grene, and red, and
iiij. blew courtens to the same. And two coverlettes with lyons; a blak
testour for a bed, with iiij. blak curtens, and vj. pecys of blak
hanging to the same; ij. cusshens of blak velvet; a cusshyn of blak
damask; a cusshen of grene worstede; a long cusshen of blewe saten
figure. A blak coveryng for a bed of borde alisaunder. And xj. peces of
grene saye, borduryd with acorns, to hang with a chambre. A vestment of
blak velwet with orfrayes, browderyd with my saide husbondys armes and
myne; an awbe; j. chesyppill, with a stole, and all that belongeth
therto; ij. corporas casys of cloth of gold; j. olde vestment; an awbe;
an awter clothe wyth the image of Our Lorde; a corporas case of blewe
cloth of golde. A nother of blewe saten and russet. An awter clothe of
staynyd werke. And iij. stenyd clothes with imagis in them to hang a
chapell. ij. awter clothes of white sylke with red crosses, and ij.
curtens with white frengis and red. And iiij. curtens, ij. of rayed
sarsenet, and two of grene. An awter clothe; a litell pece of grene
tartron; a payer of fustyans of iiij. breddys iij. yerdys iij. quarters
long. A paire of fyne shetys overworne of iiij. yerdes brede. An hede
shete and iij. payer of newe shetys of iij. levis, of iij. ellys and an
half long. And two payer of shetys of ij. levis and an half long. And
iij. hed shetys of ij. bredys, and vj. paier of shetys over worne of ij.
levis. And vj. paier of houshold shetis. And two paier of wollen
blankettes. And a violet gowne, furryd with martrons. A blak gowne
furryd with gray. A blak gowne furryd with white. A blak gowne furryd
with martrons. And a nyght gowne of blak furryd with martrons. A kirtill
of tawny chamlet. A purfill of ermyns of ij. skynne depeth, and iij.
yardys and an half long. A purfill of martrons of j. skynne depeth, and
iiij. yardis long. A purfill of shankes of ij. skynne deppeth, and iiij.
yardis long. A bonet of poudrid ermyns. And a pece of cloth of golde
with dropis, which was of a duplade. And a dosen of diaper napkyns of
flour de lyce werke and crownes. And a dosen and a half of naptkyns of
playne clothe with blew pelowers, and a pece of clothe of diaper werke
to make with a dosen naptkyns. A bordecloth of floure de lice werk and
crownes of x. yardis and an half long, and iij. yardis brode. And a
nother bordecloth of flour de lyce werk and crownes, viij. yardes and a
half long, ij. yardes and a quarter brode; a towell of diaper of flower
delice werke and crownys of xx^ti yardys long, and iij. quarters brode.
Another towell of flower delice werke and crownys of iij. quarters brode
and xviij. yardes long. A nother of latise werke and diaper of iij.
quarter brede xiiij. yerdes di’ long. Another towell of iiij. greynys,
and a fret of viij. yerdes di’ long. A nother towell of latise werk and
crownys vj. yerdes and di’ long and iij. quarters brede. And two
towellis of great diaper werke, iij. yerdes and a quarter long and iij.
quarter brode. And a pece of new creste clothe conteygnyng xxiij. ellys.
And two towellys of great diaper werkes of xiij. yerdes long and iij.
quarter in brede. And vij. grete cofers, v. chestis, ij. almaryes like a
chayer, and a blak cofer bounden with iron. vj. yoyned stoles, iiij.
kaskettys, v. litell joynyd stoles. A litill table, ij. yerdes long. A
rounde table, ij. trestelles, ij. garnysshe and di’ of pewter vessell
counterfete, wherof j. garnysshe and di’ is newe; and vj. great
kandelstikkis newe of laton, and iiij. newe bellyd kandelstikkis, ij.
litill kandelstikkis, vij. basens of pewater, and v. brasse pannys, of
the which oon is xvj. galons, and two of them of viij. galons a pece,
and the other ij. more lesse. A grete standing chafer of laton with a
lyon apon the lydde, ij. chafers of brasse, and ij. litill brasse
pottys, ij. grete cobardys, and ij. other cobardys more and lesse, ij.
fyer pannys, a lityll skelet. A ladill and a scomer of laton, ij.
colondyrs, ij. spyttys, ij. dreping pannes of iron, iij. dressing
knyfys, ij. lechyng knyfys, ij. choppyng knyfys. A tryvet. A brasen
morter with a pestell of iron, ij. stone morters, ij. gredyrons, j.
payer of potte hokys, a flesshe hoke, and a kolerake. Provydid alwey
that myn executours by the advyse of myn overseers ordeigne and put in
safegarde to be kept after my discease in to som religious place unto
the day of my said doughters mariage, and to the behofe and promocyon of
the same, all and every part of the forsaid plate and juelx with all
other stuffe of houshold by me to her, as is abovewritten, yoven and
bequethed, except souche stuffe as canne not be kept from mowghtes,
which I will she have the rule and governaunce of for the safegarde of
the same and for her wele. And if my saide doughter Mary dye unmaryed,
then I yeve and bequethe all the forsaid plate with all other stuffe of
housholde to my soon Mathewe her brother. And if it fortune that he dye
unmaryed, as God forfende, then I yeve and bequeth all and every part of
my forsaid plate, juelx, and stuffe of housholde unto my soon Sir Edward
Ponyngis. And yef it fortune the said Edward to dye, as God defende,
that then all the forsaid juelx and other stuffe above written, except a
playne standing cuppe of sylver and gilt, with the cover, the knoppe,
and the devyse of the same with gryffons hede in the botom wrought apon
blewe asure, weying xxvj. uncis, which I geve to my doughter in lawe,
Dame Isabell Ponyngis, to be dyvydyd by th’advice of the overseers of
this my present testament and last wille, and evynly to be departed unto
Antony Browne and Robert Browne, my brethern in lawe, they to do with it
thair fre wille. And as touching myne Agnus, tablettes with dyamondys,
saphires, perlys, grete and small crosses, gurdillis, dymyseyntes,
gownys, with all other thingis longing to myne apparayle, as is above
written, yef it fortune my said doughter Mary decease, I geve and
bequethe all and every part of it to my kynnyswoman Margaret Hasslake.
And if the said Margaret dye, that then all the said apparell
particularly written before remaigne to my said doughter-in-lawe Dame
Isabell Ponyngys. Also xx. marc which I lent unto my son Sir Edward
Ponynges, I woll that it be distributyd by the discrecion of myn
executours and overseers among souche as been knowen my servauntys at
the day of my discease. The residue of all my singuler goodes, catallys,
and juellys after my dettys payde, and my bequestes performyd and
fulfyllyd, and burying done, I geve and fully bequeth to my sonnys, Ser
Edward Ponyngis and Mathew Browne, and theym to dispose and do theire
fre wille, to pray and to do for my soule as they wolde I sholde do for
them, as they will aunswer afore God. And of this my testament and last
wille I make and ordeigne myn executours my forsaid sonnes, Ser Edward
Ponyngys and Mathew Browne, and theire supervysours Humphrey Conyngesby
and Richard Tuke. And I bequeth to every of myne executours for thair
labour lx_s._, and to every of myne overseers for thair labours xl_s._
In Wittenesse hereof, I the said Dame Elizabeth to this my present
testment and last wille have put my seale. Yoven at London, the day and
yere abovesaide.


Probatum fuit suprascriptum testamentum coram domino apud Lamehith
xxvj^to die mensis Junii, anno Domini supradicto, ac approbatum &c. Et
commissa fuit administratio &c., Matheo Browne, filio ejusdem et
executori &c. de bene &c. Ac de pleno inventario &c., citra festum
Sancti Petri quod dicitur _ad Vincula_, reservata potestate committendi
&c., Edwardo Ponynges militi, executori &c.

    [Footnote 201-1: [Register Milles, 12.]]

    [Footnote 203-1: A metal facing for a girdle.]

  [[v. newe carpettys of ij. ellys in lengeth and yarde and halfe brode,
  _text has “brode.”_

  souche stuffe as canne not be kept from mowghtes, which I will
  _text has “mowghtes.”_]]


7

WILLIAM PASTON[205-1]

[Sidenote: 1496 / SEPT. 7]

In Dei nomine, Amen. The vij^th day of the moneth of Septembre in the
yere of Our Lord God m^{l.}CCCClxxxxvj., I, William Paston of London,
gentilman, being of hooll mynde and in good memory, laud and praysing be
unto Almighti God, make and ordeigne this my present testament and last
wille in maner and fourme folowing, that is to sey:--Furst, I geve and
bequeith my soule unto my saide Lorde God, to our blessed Lady Sainte
Marye Virgyne, and to all the holy companye of Heven. And I will that my
body be buried in the church of Blak Frerez, in London, at the north
ende of the high altar there by my Lady Anne, late my wife. Also, I will
that there be yeven unto the saide church of Blak Frires, where my saide
body shall lye, to be praide for, and for the place of my saide burying
to have a large stone upon the saide Lady Anne and me, a convenient
rewarde by th’advise and discrecion of myne executours underwriten.
Also, I will that all my dettes be wele and truely contente and paide.
Also, I wille that xx_li._ in money be geven and disposed for my soule
and all Christen soules in dedes of pitee and charitee the day of my
saide burying, that is to sey:--emonges pouer people and prisoners
within the citee of London and withoute. Also I will that I have a
preste of honest conversacion to synge bothe for me, and for suche as I
am chargid to do syng for at Cambrige, as my servant, Thomas Andrewe,
can shew by the space of viij. yeres. Also, I will that for every wronge
by me done in my life tyme a dewe recompence be made there fore by
th’enformacion of my saide servante, Thomas Andrew, in that behalf.
Also, I will that all my landes and tenementes with th’appurtenances be
devyded bytwene my ij. doughters, Agnes and Elizabeth, by the discresion
of my executours underwritten, and after th’enformacion of my saide
servaunte, Thomas Andrew, to whome I have shewid my entent and mynde in
the same manye tymes, and often to have to theym and to the heires of
theire ij. bodies lawfully begoten. Also, I wille that all the
revennuyes of my fee symple landes, over and a bove the reparacions and
charges of the same that shalbe due at Mychelmas next after my deceasce
be takyn of my tenauntes and fermours there by favoure, and that the
same revenues go to the contentacion and payment of my saide dettes
assone as it can be convenyently gadred and levied, &c. Also, I will
that none of my tenantes nor fermers, suche as be of grete age and
fallith in poverte, be in any wise vexid or t[r]oublid after my deceasce
by my executours underwritten for no maner of olde dettes due unto me
before the day of my deces. Also, I will that nether my heires,
executours, nor non other person for theim, nor in theire names, in any
wise vex, sue, or trouble the saide Thomas Andrew, my servaunte, after
my deceasce of or for any maner of rekenynges or other maters bitwene
hym and me in all my life tyme, but utterly thereof I discharge hym and
will, and will that he be therof acquyte and discharged in that behalve
as I have shewid and declared in my life unto my doughter Elizabeth,
Mastres Hide, Master Ursewik, Archedecon of Richemonde, Master Doctor
Myddelton, Master Thomas Madies, chapeleyn to my Lorde Cardinall,[206-1]
Master John Shaa, Alderman of London, Master Reede, Master Christofer
Mildelton, proctours of the courte of Canterbury, and many other
honorable folkis, and to my servauntes in my life tyme, consideryng that
he hathe ben my trewe and feithfull servant these xix. yeres or more, in
which seasone he hath had dyvers grete paynfull besynes and labours in
my causis, by whose gode policie and meanes I have purchased moche of my
saide fe symple landes, which also canne geve best enformacion how all
suche landes as I have purchased stonden, and what consciens is there
in, and howe every thyng shalbe ordred. Also, I will that the churche of
Saynte Petre, in Wodenorton have a hole vestyment of the price of v.
marc. Also, I will that Elizabeth Crane be wele maried at my costis, or
ellis by the menes of my doughters, unto suche a personne as may
dispende by yere xx. marc, or ellis to a gode marchaunt or other
craftisman. Item, I will that Christofer Talbot be treuly contentid and
paied of his yerely annuyte of v. merke by yere duryng his life. Item,
I will that Thomas Dokkyng have surely his annuyte of xl_s._ by yere
duryng his life. Item, I wille that the bargayne of Adam Sowter be
recompensid after th’enformacion had of my saide servaunte, Thomas
Andrew. Also, I will that every of my servauntes be rewarded for theire
good and diligent laboure and attendance had a bowte me after the
discresion of my executours underwritten. Also, I will that all suche of
my godes moveable in Warwikes Inne, and in my place callid Castre Clere,
in Norffolk, and in my place in Norwiche, be solde by the discresion of
my executours, tawarde and for the contentacion and payment of my saide
dettes and performance of this my present will. Also, I will that the
vicar of Fyncham be recompensid of his bargayne betwene hym and me after
th’enformacion of the saide Thomas Andrewe. Item, I will that all my
servauntes, suche as be behynde of their wages and dueties, be trewly
content and paied. Also, I will that all other my godes not bequethid,
this my will fulfilled, my dettes paied, and all my wronges recompensed
by th’enformacion of the saide Thomas Andrew, be departid bytwixte my
ij. doughter beforesaide after the discresion of my saide executours.
And also, for as moche as I have not sufficient redy money, and that my
dettis cannot be redely levied, therfore I will that money be made of
all suche plate as I have for the haste of contentacion of my dettes
that I owe of my buriallis. And of this my present testament and laste
will I make and ordeyne and constitute my executours the moste reverend
fadre in God my Lorde Cardinall, the right high and myghty Prynces, my
lady the Kynges modre, my Lord Dawbeney, and Sir Edwarde Poynynges,
Knyght, my nevew, whome I hartely beseche in executyng and performyng
this my laste will to do and dispose concernyng the same in every thyng
as they shall thynke best to the pleasure of Almyghty God, and for the
helthe of my sowle and all Cristen sowles.


Probatum fuit suprascriptum testamentum coram domino apud Lamehith,
xxviij^o die mensis Novembris, Anno Domini Millesimo CCCC^o nonagesimo
sexto, juramento Thomæ Andrew et Laurencii Canwike, testium, quibus
Thomæ et Lawrencio commissa fuit administracio per viam intestati, pro
eo et ex eo quod executores in suo testamento nominati ex certis causis
legitimis refutarunt, de bene et fideliter administrand’ eadem juxta et
secundum vires ipsius defuncti testamentum sive ultimam voluntatem, ac
primo de solvend’ æs alienum in quo idem defunctus hujusmodi mortis suæ
tempore extitit obligatus, deinde legata in hujusmodi suo testamento
contenta, quatenus bona et debita &c., ad sancta &c.

    [Footnote 205-1: [Register Horne, 12.]]

    [Footnote 206-1: Cardinal Morton.]

  [[I discharge hym and will, and will that
  _text unchanged: printed “and will, and / will” at line break_]]


8

MARGARET PASTON[208-1]

[Sidenote: 1504 / NOV. 24]

I, Margaret Paston, widow, ‘late wife of Edmond Paston, Squier. . . . .
24^o Nov. MCCCCCIV. . . . . . my sinful bodie to be buried in the
chyrche of Our Lady in Iteryngham.’

‘Item, to the Hey Awter of the chirche of Sharington, vj_s._ viij_d._

‘Item, to the reparacion of the said churche, xx_s._

‘Item, to the reparacion of the chirch of Manington, x_s._

‘Item, to the reparacion of the chirch of Itteringham, iij_s._ iv_d._

‘Item, to the Hey Awter of Itteringham, iij_s._ iv_d._

‘Item, to the Gilde of Oure blessid Ladi there, iij_s._ iv_d._

‘Item, to the Heigh Awter of Saxthorpe, ij_s._

‘Item, to the Heigh Awter of the chirche of Little Baningham, iij_s._
iiij_d._

‘Item, to the Heigh Awter of the chirche of Woolterton, ij_s._

‘Item, to the Heigh Awter of the chirche of Wood Dalling, iij_s._
iiij_d._

‘Item, to the reparacion of heigh way in Woolterton, v_s._

‘Item, I will that my son William Lumnor have c. sheep, xxiij. nete, x.
quarters wheat, xx. quarters barley, x. quarters oats, and as many
horse, cartes, plowghes, and harowghes, with alle her apparell, as shall
extende to the valu of vi_li._ xiij_s._ iiij_d._, beside alle the
foresaide shepe, &c.’ . . . . in recompense of all goods . . . . that
Thomas Brigge, late my husbande, by his testament and last will
bequeathed or gave to the said William Lumnor . . . . He to have all the
hangings in the grey chamber over the parlour within the manor place of
Manington, and the great bed with the covering and hangings, ‘which is
of tapestrie worke;’ . . . . also all the hangings of the halle and
parlour, ‘with the falte table in the parlure, and all the tables and
stooles in the haule, and all the rede hangings of the rede chaumber
over the pantry and botry, and a bede of red saye’ . . . . . viz., its
belongings, pillows, coverlets, &c., &c.

‘Item, to the said William Lumner, my son, ij. grete rosting aundernes,
iij. spetes, ij. brass pots with all the brewing vessels.’

Item, to my daughter, Margaret Browne, ‘my fruntelet of purpill velvet,
my girdill whereof the herneys is silver and gilt, and the corse is of
damaske gold, and also my fruntelet of crymsyn velvet.’

Item, to my daughter Elizabeth Whymbergh my dymysent silver and gilt,
and my corse of crymsyn velvet pirled with gold, and also a fruntlet of
crymsyn velvet.

Item, to Margaret Lomnor, my daughter-in-lawe, my prymer clad with grene
velvet.

Item, to my daughter, Anne Lomnor, my russet gown pervild with menks,
and my best coral bedes conteyning once fifty, and my best bonnett.

Item, to Elizabeth Gayne, xiij_s._ iiij_d._, to the bying of a gowne for
her.

Item, to my son, John Lomnor, a brass pott, a basin, with an ewer of
pewter with a roose of lateyn in the bottom of the said basin, and four
platters, and four dishes, and iiij. sawcers of pewter.

Item, to my son, Henry Lomnor, xl_s._

Item, to my nephew, Thomas Lomnor . . . . a feather bed, &c., &c.

Item, to my nephew, James Lomnor . . . . . a feather bed, &c.

‘And all the residue of alle my goodes and catallis, sylver plate, and
all my detts to me owing, above not bequeathed nor assigned, I give and
bequeath to my son, William Lomnor, whom I ordeine and make my
executor,’ first to pay debts, and distribute the remainder ‘to the most
plesure to God and helthe to my sowle.’

Proved at Norwich, 19 May 1505, by William Lumnor.

    [Footnote 208-1: [Reg. Norvic. ‘Rix’ f. 107.]]

  [[‘Item ... Item ... ‘And
  _opening quotes printed as shown_]]


9

DAME AGNES PASTON[209-1]

[Sidenote: 1510 / MAY 31]

‘Dame Agnes Paston, widow, late the wife of Sir John Paston, Knight,
deceased,’ makes her will 31 May, A.D. 1510, 2 Hen. VIII. To be buried,
if she die in London, in the church of the Black Friars, by her husband
John Harvy; or, if she die in Kent, in the parish church in Sondryche.
Goods in three chests to be divided among her three sons, George,
Thomas, and Edward. Bequeaths to her son George Hervy a pair of large
sheets of her own spinning, and all her bedding at Sondryche to her son
Thomas Isley. Other bequests to John Palmer of Otteford, to the parson
of Brasted, to her daughter Isabel Isley, her cousin Alys Petham, to
Margaret Palmer, to Mrs. Bygote ‘with my Lady Marqueys.’[209-2] To her
son-in-law William Hatteclyff a basin and ewer, parcel gilt, for 20
marks, if he will give so much for it; otherwise it is to go to her sons
George Harvy and Edw. Isley. To her son George a silver salt with a
cover, at Leuesham. To her chaplain Sir Robert ‘the complete bedde
within my little draught chambre att Sonderiche,’ and 10 marks a year
for 5 years, to pray for her soul and the souls of John Hervy, Sir John
Paston, and John Isley, her husbands. To her son Thomas Isley’s
children, and her own and her daughter Isabel Hatteclyff’s children, 5
marks each. To her son George Hervy, ‘a standing cupp with a kever,
silver and gilt with sekylles,’ and a gold cross. To her daughter Isley
a ring with a rebewe. To her son Thomas Isley her gelding. Other
bequests to her cousins Margaret Palmer and Thos. Waserer’s wife; also
to young Potter, the man of law, to Agnes Waserer, and to Eliz. mother
to Thomas Waserer’s wife, to Joan Julles, William Tidman, to her servant
Kyllingworth, to Vincent her housekeeper, to Sir Robert, parish priest
of Sonderyche, to Sir William of Nokold. Mr. Robert Scalys parson of
Braysted to be overseer of her will; her sons George Harvy and Thos.
Isley to be her executors.

Proved at Lambeth, 19 June 1510.

    [Footnote 209-1: [Register Benet, 29.]]

    [Footnote 209-2: Cecily, widow of Thomas, first Marquis of
    Dorset.]




CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE OCCURRENCES

  [This Table is intended partly to serve the purpose of a Table of
  Contents to the more important Letters, partly to enable the reader
  to see at a glance the bearing of particular transactions on the
  general history of the times. The Nos. quoted are those of the
  Letters.]

  [Transcriber’s Note:
  In the printed book, some items on this list were run-in, with two
  entries in a single paragraph. These have been silently regularized.]


HENRY V

1413

    _Accession of Henry V._

1415

    _Henry V.’s first campaign in France--Battle of Agincourt._

1417-8

    _Henry V.’s second campaign in France_, 1.

1419

  13 Jan.
    _Capture of Rouen_, 1.

1420

  24 Mar.
    Marriage Settlement of William Paston, 4.
  21 May.
    _Treaty of Troyes._

1422

  31 Aug.
    _Henry V. dies at Vincennes._


HENRY VI

1422

  1 Sept.
    _Accession._ The King only nine months old.

1424

    Outrages committed by Walter Aslak in Norfolk, 6.

1425

    _Disputes between Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, and Beaufort,
      Bishop of Winchester._

1425-6

    Disputes between William Paston and John Wortes, 10, 11, 12.

1427

    _Beaufort made a Cardinal._

1428-9

    _Siege of Orleans--Raised by Joan of Arc._

1429

  6 Nov.
    _Coronation of Henry VI. at Westminster._
  7 Dec.
    William Paston made a brother of the Monastery of Bury, 19.

1431

  30 May.
    _Joan of Arc burned at Rouen._
  17 Dec.
    _Coronation of Henry VI. at Paris._

1432

  29 Nov.
    _Demands of the Earl of Warwick touching the charge of the King’s
      education_, 24.

1434?

    William Dalling’s petition against William Paston, 25.

1434-5

    Sir John Fastolf, captain of Le Mans, 27.

1435

  Aug.
    _Peace Conferences at Arras--broken off by England._
  14 Sept.
    _Death of the Duke of Bedford at Rouen. The Duke of York made
      Regent._
  21 Sept.
    _The Duke of Burgundy deserts England, and makes a separate
      peace with France._

1436

    _Recovery of Paris by the French._
    _The Duke of York lands in Normandy, and recovers several places
      from the French._
    _Calais besieged by the Duke of Burgundy, but relieved by the Duke
      of Gloucester._

1437

  19 Feb.
    _James I. of Scotland murdered._
  16 July.
    _The Duke of York recalled from France, and the Earl of Warwick
      sent in his place._

1439

    _Death of Warwick at Rouen. York made Regent again._
    _Peace Conferences at Calais--ineffectual._

About 1440

    John Paston’s introduction to Margaret Mauteby, 34.
    His marriage to her, 35.

1440

    _Release of the Duke of Orleans_, 36.

1443

    John Paston ill in London, 47.

1444

  Feb.
    William Paston and Chief-Justice Fortescue both too ill to go on
      circuit, 51.
  14 Aug.
    Death of William Paston, 56.

1445

    Disputes of Agnes Paston with the Vicar of Paston, 62.
  22 April.
    _Marriage of Henry VI. with Margaret of Anjou_, 62.

1447

    _Parliament of Bury.--Arrest and death of Gloucester._
    _Death of Cardinal Beaufort._

1448

  17 Feb.
    John Paston dispossessed of Gresham by Lord Molynes, 102.
    A relief claimed by Lady Morley, 75.
    _Daniel said to be out of favour_, 75.
  22 May.
    Affray at Coventry between the retainers of Sir Robert Harcourt
      and Sir Humphrey Stafford, 78.

1449

  Mar.
    Death of Edmund Paston--his nuncupative will dated 21 March, 85.
  May.
    _Robert Wenyngton captures a fleet of 100 ships_, 90.
    Friar Hauteyn’s claim to Oxnead, 63, 87.
  6 Oct.
    John Paston again occupies Gresham, 88, 102.
    The King in the Marches of Wales, 96.
    _Capture of Rouen by the French._
    Stephen Scrope a suitor of Elizabeth Paston, 93, 94.

1450

  28 Jan.
    John Paston’s wife driven out of Gresham, 102, 103.
  7 Feb.
    _Impeachment of the Duke of Suffolk_, 101.
    John Paston presents a petition to the King in Parliament against
      Lord Molynes, 102.
  Mar.
    Foreigners light on the coast of Norfolk, and take people
      prisoners, 105, 106.
  15 April.
    Battle of Fourmigni--Sir Thomas Kiriel taken prisoner, 120.
  30 April.
    The Duke of Suffolk’s letter to his son, 117.
  April or May.
    Daniel enters the manor of Brayston, 108, 119.
  2 May.
    _The Duke of Suffolk murdered at sea_, 120, 121.
  May.
    New appointments to offices of state, 123.
    _Jack Cade’s rebellion_, 126.
  12 Aug.
    _Loss of Cherbourg, the last place held by the English in
      Normandy_, 131.
  Aug.
    Disturbances in Norfolk, 132, 133.
    Thomas Denyes and the Earl of Oxford, 123, 124, 132.
    J. Paston’s dispute with Lord Molynes, 131, 135, 136, 139, 145.
  Sept.
    _The Duke of York comes over from Ireland, and causes a change of
      administration_, 142, 143.
    Molynes and his men indicted of felony, 147.
  Oct.
    Election of two knights of the shire for Norfolk, 148, 149.
  Nov.
    _Meeting of Parliament--Oldhall chosen Speaker_, 151.
    Tuddenham and Heydon unpopular in Norfolk, 154, 170.
  Dec.
    _Oyer and terminer_ in Suffolk, at Beccles, 160, 161.
    _Oyer and terminer_ going into Norfolk, 162.

1451

  Jan.
    An _oyer and terminer_ for Kent, 169.
    _Oyer and terminer_ to be held at Norwich at Easter, 174, 175.
    John Paston re-enters Gresham, 178.
  25 Feb.
    Bettes arrested at a court held by Gonnor at Routon, 178.
  1 Mar.
    Heydon’s horse brought through Aylesham into Norwich, 179, 180.
  1 Mar.
    Tuddenham and Heydon expected to regain their ascendency, 184.
    Petition to Parliament against Sir Thomas Tuddenham, 185.
  April.
    Tuddenham and Heydon to be indicted at Norwich, 186.
  May.
    Lord Molynes and his men indicted at Walsingham, 189, 190;
      acquitted by favour of the King, 189, 193.
  1 July.
    Death of Sir Harry Inglos, 201.
  Aug.
    _Surrender of Bayonne:--entire loss of Gascony and Guienne by
      the English._
  Dec.
    Daniel hoping to re-enter Brayston, 206:
      which he did soon after, 119.

1452

  7 April.
    Good Friday. _A general pardon granted by the King._
  April.
    The Duke of Norfolk coming to Norfolk to redress disorders,
      210, 211, 212.
    The King also coming into Norfolk, 210, 211.
    Outrages of Charles Nowell and others, 212, 213, 215, 217, 241.
    Roger Church, being taken prisoner by his own consent, accuses
      many gentlemen of sedition, 214, 216, 217, 218, 219, 241.
    _An army sent under Shrewsbury to recover Guienne._
  18 Dec.
    The Duke of York pawns jewels to Sir J. Fastolf, 184.

1453

    Building operations [at Caister?], 224, 225.
  April.
    Visit of Margaret of Anjou to Norwich, 226.
  July.
    Deaths of Philip Berney and Sir John Heveningham, 227, 228.
  July.
    _The Earl of Shrewsbury defeated and slain at Castillon. Final
      loss of Guienne._
  Aug.
    _The King falls ill at Clarendon._
  Dec.?
    _The Duke of Norfolk’s petition against Somerset_, 230.

1454

  Jan.
    _The King’s imbecility_, 235.
    _York and other Lords coming up to London_, 235.
  12 Jan.
    Walter Ingham waylaid and beaten by procurement of Thomas Denyes,
      238.
    Thomas Denyes and his wife put in prison, 239, 240, 244, 245.
  22 Mar.
    _Death of Cardinal Kemp_, 239.
  3 April.
    _The Duke of York made Protector._

1454?

    Marriage proposed between John Clopton and Elizabeth Paston,
      242, 243.

1454

  May or June.
    _Defeat of the French in an attack on Jersey and Guernsey_, 247.
  6 June.
    Wardship of Thomas Fastolf of Cowhaw, granted to John Paston and
      Thomas Howys, 248.
    --Paid for by Sir J. Fastolf, 271.
    --Disputed by Sir Philip Wentworth, 248, 263, 266, 267, 277, 278,
      289, 292, 307.
  9 June.
    _Edward the King’s son created Prince of Wales_, 247.
  5 July.
    _The Duke of York and other Lords coming up from the North--Lords
      appointed to keep the sea_, 249.
  11 July.
    Marriage proposed for Elizabeth Paston by Lord Grey of Hastings,
      250, 252.
  July.
    _The Duke of York is commissioned to convey the Duke of Exeter to
      the North, and commit him to Pomfret Castle_, 254.
  Aug.?
    Sir John Fastolf goes to reside at Caister, 254, 260.
  Sept.
    Pestilence in London, 260.
  Nov.
    Fastolf proposes to sue an attaint, 267, 268.
  25 Dec.
    _The King recovers from his illness_, 270.

1455

  5 Feb.
    _Somerset released from the Tower._
  7 Feb.
    Sir J. Fastolf resents words spoken at a dinner at Norwich, 272.
  4 Mar.
    _The questions between Somerset and York referred to arbitrators._
  17 Mar.
    Presentation to Stokesby church, 273, 274.
  29 Mar.
    Sir Thomas Howes vexed by Andrews and others, 276, 297.
  22 May.
    _The first battle of St. Albans_, 283-5, 287.
  June.
    Election of Howard and Chamberlain for Norfolk, 288, 291, 294,
      295.
  [June or July].
    _Attempt of the Scots on Berwick._
  7 July.
    Poynings acquitted of treason, etc., 297.
  19 July.
    Dispute between Warwick and Lord Cromwell before the King, 299.
  25 July.
    Slander against John Paston, Yelverton, and Alyngton, 300, 301.
  26 July.
    Letter of the Bishop of Lincoln, 302.
  28 Oct.
    _Affray at Radford’s place in Devonshire between the men of the Earl
      of Devonshire and of Lord Bonvile_, 303.
    _The King sick again at Hertford_, 303.
  13 Nov.
    Fastolf and the Duke of Bedford’s goods, 305, 319, 320, 323.
  19 Nov.
    _The Duke of York appointed Protector a second time._
  25 Nov.
    Daniel comes to Rising Castle, 306.
    Letter of Judge Bingham about Stephen Scrope, 308.
    Fastolf’s claims against the Crown, 309, 310.

1456

  6 Jan.
    Fastolf about to make his will, 314.
  20 Jan.
    Fastolf and Lady Whitingham, 317-9.
  5 Feb.
    Fastolf and Lord Willoughby’s executors, 321.
  9 Feb.
    _York and Warwick come to the Parliament with 300 armed men_,
      322.
  25 Feb.
    _York again discharged of the Protectorship._
  1 Mar.
    Fastolf’s ‘compert’ sped in the Exchequer, 324.
  27 Mar.
    Letter of Archbishop Bourchier, 326.
  30 Mar.
    Letter of Dame Alice Ogard, 327.
  8 May.
    Progress of the attaint, 330.
    _Attack on foreign merchants in London_, 330, 331.
  15 May.
    The King at Sheen, the Queen at Tutbury, etc., 331, 334.
  1 June.
    Farmers of Cowhaw, etc., 333.
  7 June.
    _Siege expected at Calais_, 334.
  [29 June].
    Letter of Friar Brackley, 338.
  17 July.
    Fastolf’s proposed college, 340, 350, 351.
  31 July.
    Fastolf and the Prior of Hickling, 341.
  10 Aug.
    Learned men not easy to get this harvest, 342.
  7 Sept.
    Letter of the Archbishop of Canterbury, 344.
  8 Oct.
    _The Court at Coventry._
  16 Oct.
    _Bishop Waynflete made Chancellor in Place of Archbishop Bourchier_,
      etc., 348.
  16 Oct.
    _Affray at Coventry._
  15 Nov.
    Visit of my Lady of York to Caister, 335, 350.
  Nov.
    Suit of Paston and Howes against Andrews, 352.

1457

  1 May.
    Expenses of Fastolf’s household, 356.
    _The Court at Hereford_:--Welshmen indicted, 356.
  28 Aug.
    _The French burn Sandwich._

1458

  24 Jan. [? year].
    Earl of Salisbury excuses himself by illness from coming up to
      London, 361.
  28 Jan.
    Clement Paston and his tutor Grenefeld, 362.
  1 Feb.
    Arrival of the different Lords in London, 364.
  Feb.
    The King at Berkhampstead, 365.
  15 Mar.
    _The Council sits at the Black Friars in the forenoon and at the
      White Friars in the afternoon_, 366.
    The coast of Norfolk insulted by the French, 366.
  25 Mar.
    _Reconciliation of the Lords at London._
  29 May.
    _Sea fight off Calais on Trinity Sunday between Warwick and the
      Spaniards_, 369.
  27 Aug.
    William Worcester learning French in London, 370.
    Expenses of John Paston in 36 and 37 Hen. VI., 373.

1459

  3 Jan.
    Elizabeth Poynings to her mother, Agnes Paston, 374.
  Feb.?
    _Fray between the King’s servants and Warwick’s; after which Warwick
      goes over to Calais._
  5 Mar.
    John Paston, the eldest son, to John Paston, his father, regretting
      having given him displeasure, 375.
  29 April.
    Hastings and others ordered to be with the King at Leicester on the
      10th May. Is Paston’s son to go? 377.
  25 May.
    Osbert Mundeford to John Paston (in French), 378.
  23 Sept.
    _Battle of Bloreheath_--Lord Audley defeated by Salisbury.
  12 Oct.
    _Dispersion of the Yorkists at Ludlow._
  3 Nov.
    Will of Sir J. Fastolf, 385, 386, 387.
  5 Nov.
    Death of Sir J. Fastolf.
    Inventory of Fastolf’s goods, 388. His wardrobe, 389.
  12 Nov.
    William Paston to John Paston about Fastolf’s goods, 391.
    Bishop Waynflete’s advice, 393.
  7 Dec.
    The Yorkists attainted in the Parliament at Coventry, 396.
    Sir Philip Wentworth’s petition touching the wardship of Thomas
      Fastolf of Cowhaw, 397.

1460

  Jan.
    _Rivers and his son surprised at Sandwich, and carried over to
      Calais_, 399, 400.
    _The King coming to London, and raising the people on his way_,
      400.
  8 May.
    The Abbot of Langley excuses himself from coming up to London about
      Fastolf’s will, 407.
  10 July.
    _Battle of Northampton--the King taken prisoner._
  23 July.
    The Yorkist Lords to the authorities in Norfolk, 410.
  Oct.
    John Paston returned to Parliament, 415, 416.
  12 Oct.
    _The Duke of York coming up to London_, 419.
    _He challenges the Crown in Parliament_, 423.
  Oct.
    Inquisition taken on Fastolf’s lands at Acle, 421, 422, 423.
  29 Oct.
    Inquisition to be taken on the same for Suffolk at Bungay, 427.
  31 Dec.
    _Battle of Wakefeld--the Duke of York slain_, 430.
    J. Perse in prison, 423, 424, 425, 462.

1461

  3 Feb.
    _Battle of Mortimer’s Cross._
  17 Feb.
    _Second battle of St. Albans._
  1 Mar.
    Plot to carry off John Paston into the North, 432.
    A Whitsunday sermon of Friar Brackley, 436.


EDWARD IV

1461

  4 Mar.
    _Edward IV. proclaimed King._
    People take wages, and go up to London in spite of orders to the
      contrary, 449.
    Attempt against John Damme, _ib._
  29 Mar.
    _Battle of Towton_, 450.
  April.
    _Henry VI. besieged in Yorkshire_, 451.
  May.
    _Berwick full of Scots_, 455.
    _Earl of Wiltshire’s head set on London Bridge_, _ib._
  10 May.
    The feoffees of Fastolf’s lands mean to sell some to the Duke of
      Suffolk, 453.
  May.
    Thomas Denyes complains of Howard, 455.
    _Carlisle besieged by the Scots--the siege raised by Montague_,
      457.
  31 May.
    The Earl of Oxford anticipates disturbance from Howard, 456.
  5 June.
    The Duke of Norfolk in possession of Caister, 458.
  June.
    John Paston at Court, 458, 459.
  26 June.
    Elizabeth Poynings dispossessed of her lands, 461.
  28 June.
    _Coronation of Edward IV._
  June.
    The Parson of Snoring drags Thomas Denys out of his house, 462.
  July.
    The King should be informed of the demeaning of the shire, 463.
  3 July.
    A message for Thomas Denys’ wife, 464.
  6 July.
    Murder of Thomas Denys, 465, 469, 472, 474.
  9 July.
    Denys’ wife in great trouble, 466.
    Sir Miles Stapleton accuses John Berney of complicity in Denys’
      murder, 467, 468.
    John Berney and the under-Sheriff, 468, 469, 470, 471.
  27 July.
    John Paston restores to the King the jewels pledged to Fastolf by
      his father, the Duke of York, 473.
  1 Aug.
    Election for Norfolk, 475.
  Aug.
    John Paston’s eldest son in the King’s household, 476, 477, 478.
    Altercation between John Paston and Howard in the shire-house at
      Norwich, 477, 478.
  28 Aug.
    William Worcester out of favour with Paston and Howes, 479.
  30 Aug.
    Lord Hungerford and Robert Whityngham to Margaret of Anjou from
      Dieppe, 480.
  Aug.
    _Henry VI. and Margaret of Anjou in Scotland_, 480.
  4 Sept.
    Yelverton and Jenney take a distress at Cotton, 481, 482.
  Sept.
    The Duke of Gloucester to have Caister, 482.
  4 Oct.
    _The castles in Wales given up to Edward IV._, 483.
  9 Oct.
    Richard Calle prevents Jenney holding a court at Cotton, 485.
    Disorders committed by the occupants of Cotton Hall, 486, 487.
  11 Oct.
    The King is offended at John Paston for not obeying Privy Seals,
      484.
  2 Nov.
    John Paston delivered from the Fleet, and Howard committed to
      prison, 488.
  Dec.
    Message of the King to the people of Norfolk through Yelverton, 497,
      500.

1462

  Jan.
    Clarence and Suffolk to be sent down to Norfolk with a commission to
      judge rioters, 504.
  Feb.
    Presentation to Drayton Church, 509.
  Feb.
    _Projected invasion of England in three places in the interest of
      Henry VI._, 509.
  Feb.
    _Executions of Sir Thomas Tuddenham and of Lord Aubrey de Vere._
  Mar.
    Sir John Howard like to lose his head, 510.
  13 Mar.
    John Paston, the elder, at great expense travelling with the King,
      511.
  Mar.
    Confession of French prisoners taken at Sherringham--_the Duke of
      Somerset going into Scotland_, etc., 512.
  24 Mar.
    The King going to keep Easter at Bury, 513.
  April.
    The Earl of Worcester to be Treasurer, 515.
    The _Mary Talbot_ and the _Barge of Yarmouth_, 518, 521-3.
    _Campaign of the Earl of Warwick in Scotland_, 521.
  17 July.
    Death of Christopher Hanson, 526-8.
  July.
    _Warwick and other Lords going to Scotland in embassy_, 527,
      528.
  Sept.
    Proclamation for men to serve the King, 529.
    _The Duke of Somerset seeks to be reconciled to the King_, 529.
    John Paston’s bill in Chancery against Yelverton and Jenney,
      530.
    _Naval engagement--fifty French and Spanish ships taken_, 531.
  Oct.
    _The castle of Bamborough taken by Margaret of Anjou_, 532.
  11 Dec.
    _Alnwick, Dunstanborough, and Bamborough besieged by King Edward’s
      forces_, 533.

1463

  19 Jan.
    Return of John Paston, the eldest son, home to Norwich, 536.
  [Feb].
    A writ received at Norwich against John Paston jun. (the eldest
      son), 538.
  19 Mar.
    Ralph Lampet’s testimony about Fastolf’s will, 541.
  6 April.
    Sir Roger Chamberlain’s testimony about Fastolf’s will, 543.
  6 May.
    John Paston should have my Lord of Suffolk’s ‘good lordship’ to live
      in peace, 544.
  July.
    Examinations touching a murder, 545.
  31 Aug.
    The Duke of Norfolk desires John Paston the father’s presence at
      Framlingham, 548.
    Complaint that John Paston keeps his son, Sir John, too much at
      home, 550.
    A marriage suggested for John Paston’s daughter (Margery), 551.
    Sir John Paston leaves home clandestinely, 552.
  10 Dec.
    Plate lent by John Paston to St. Mary’s College, Cambridge, 554.

1464

  26 Jan.
    Lawsuits of Ogan and Debenham with John Paston, 555.
  28 Jan.
    Henry Berry appeals to John Paston for aid to the Monastery of St.
      Augustine’s, Canterbury, 556.
  27 Feb.
    Berney, Yelverton, and Rough summoned to appear before the King,
      558.
  29 Feb.
    Assizes at Thetford, 558, 559.
    Rebels in Cambridgeshire pardoned, 559.
    _The Duke of Somerset rebels once more_, 560.
  11 April.
    Plate and other articles delivered by the Prior of Norwich to
      Richard Calle, 561.
  25 April.
    _Battle of Hedgley Moor._
  1 May.
    _Edward IV. marries Elizabeth Woodville privately._
  8 May.
    _Battle of Hexham._--_Somerset beheaded_, 15th;
      _and Lords Hungerford and Roos_, 27th.
  Ap.--Nov.
    Depositions touching Fastolf’s will, 565.
  12 May.
    Seisin of Horninghall in Caister to be delivered to the Pastons,
      566.
  8 June.
    Commission to inquire why men did not come more quickly to serve the
      King when summoned, 567.
  28 June.
    Suit by Jenney against Paston, 568.
    Petition of John Paston to Edward IV. for license to found a college
      at Caister, 569.
  10 Sept.
    Agreement of the King with John Paston for the foundation of the
      college, 571.
  20 Nov.
    Outlawry of John Paston, 572.
  3 Dec.
    Mocking letter addressed to John Paston, 574.

1465

  7 Feb.
    Judgment against Daubeney, Ric. Calle, etc., 576.
  31 Mar.
    Message by William Worcester to Sir Thomas Howes, 577.
  8 April.
    The Duke of Suffolk lays claim to Drayton and Hellesdon, 578,
      580.
  3 May.
    His bailiffs trouble the tenants there, 579, 581, 585, 590.
  13 May.
    Margaret Paston wishes John Jenney put out of the commission of the
      peace, 582.
  20 May.
    Paston’s servants take distresses at Drayton, 583.
  26 May.
    _Coronation of Elizabeth Woodville as Queen._
  27 May.
    Right of presentation to Drayton church, 584.
  15 June.
    Master Popy’s examination, 587.
  18 June.
    John Rysing imprisoned at Ipswich, 588, 590.
  18-21 June.
    Examination of witnesses touching Fastolf’s will, 589.
  6 July?
    The Duke of Suffolk raising men, 592.
  10 July.
    His men attempt to enter Hellesdon, 593, 594, 595, 598.
    The Parson of Brandeston taken, 597.
  July?
    _Henry VI. taken prisoner in Lancashire, and committed to the
      Tower._
  7 Aug.
    Outrages committed by Suffolk’s men on Paston’s servants going to
      hold a court at Drayton, 599.
  7 Aug.
    Matters concerning John Russe, 600, 601.
    Will of Nich. Pickering, 602, 603.
  18 Aug.
    Sessions held after the assizes by Yelverton, 604.
    Margaret Paston going up to her husband in London, 604.
  Aug.
    John Paston examined touching Fastolf’s will, 606.
  14 Sept.
    Margaret Paston in London, 607.
    Commission touching right of presentation to Drayton church,
      608.
  21 Sept.
    John Paston desires his wife to send him worsted for doublets,
      609.
  22 Sept.
    Margaret Paston enters Cotton on her way back from London, 610,
      613.
  27 Sept.
    John Salet supposed to have found evidence in the register of wills
      in favour of Suffolk’s title to Hellesdon and Drayton, 611.
  15, 16 Oct.
    Attack on the lodge at Hellesdon by the Duke of Suffolk, 616,
      617.
  18 Oct.
    The Duke of Norfolk comes of age, 614.
    Message from the King to Sir William Yelverton, 618.
  10 Nov.
    Wymondham of Felbrigg invites Margaret Paston to his house, 619.

1466

  12 May.
    Friar John Mowth inquires touching bonds delivered by Friar Brackley
      to William Paston, 628.
  22 May.
    Death of John Paston. His funeral, 637.
  May, June.
    Examinations touching Fastolf’s will, 639.
  17 July.
    The Paston family proved to be ‘of worshipful blood since the
      Conquest,’ 641, 643.
  16 Sept.
    Will of Agnes Paston, 644, 645, 646.
  29 Oct.
    Margaret Paston to Sir John Paston touching his father’s will,
      649.
    Sir John Paston wishes Arblaster to refuse administration of his
      father’s will, 655.
    J. Strange proposes a marriage for Margery Paston, 657.

1467

  7 Feb.
    Yelverton labouring to get new witnesses up to London, 661.
  Mar.
    John Paston, the younger, desires to marry Lady Boleyn’s daughter,
      662, 666.
  3 April.
    Witnesses coming up to London,--Abbot of Langley and Witchingham.
      Henry Inglos will not come without a subpœna, 663.
  April.
    Sir John Paston hurts his hand at a tournament at Eltham, 665.
  April.
    Evidence of Friar Mowth touching Master Brackley and Sir John
      Fastolf’s will, 666.
  1 May.
    Wager of Sir John Paston touching the marriage of the Princess
      Margaret and ‘the Lord Charles,’ son and heir of the Duke of
      Burgundy, 667.
  2 July.
    Evidence found during Fastolf’s life by William Worcester touching
      the lands which belonged to the De la Poles, 670.
  11 July.
    Fastolf of Cowhaw intends to assault Caister, 671.
  28 Aug.
    Fastolf’s trustees make grant to Sir John Paston of manors in
      Caister, etc., 675.
  2 Oct.
    Sir John Paston grants the manor of Hemnales in Cotton to the Duke
      of Norfolk, 677.
    Petition of John Herling of Basingham to Margaret Paston, 678.

1468

  11 Jan.
    Release made by Fastolf’s trustees to Sir John Paston of manors in
      Caister, etc., 680.
    Proposal to found Fastolf’s college at Cambridge, if it cannot be
      at Caister or at St. Benet’s, 681.
    William Worcester congratulates Margaret Paston that Caister is to
      be at her commandment, 681.
  12 April.
    Hugh Fenn intercedes for a poor tenant in Catts lands, from whom a
      distress was taken by Thomas Pecock, Sir John Paston’s servant.
    Titleshale had no right to sell Catts to Fastolf, 682.
  18 April.
    Sir John Paston is ordered to be ready by the 1st June to accompany
      the Princess Margaret into Flanders, 683.
  3 July.
    _Marriage of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and the Princess
      Margaret_, 684.
  16 July.
    General pardon to William Paston, 685.
  18 July.
    The Earl of Oxford desires Sir John Paston to get him ‘three horse
      harness,’ 686.
  22 July.
    Sir John Paston to Anne Haute, 687.
  10 Oct.
    Howes agrees with the Duke of Norfolk about Caister, 688.
    Declaration by Howes against the authenticity of Fastolf’s will,
      689.
  28 Oct.
    The Duchess of Suffolk intends to enter Cotton, 690.
  9 Nov.
    Sir John Paston hiring men to keep Caister, 691.
  15 Dec.
    Elizabeth Ponyngs complains of Sir Robert Fenys, who occupies her
      lands, 692, 693.
    Sir George Browne to John Paston, 694.

1469

    William Ebesham sends Sir J. Paston an account for scrivener’s work,
      695.
  7 Jan.
    The Duchess of Suffolk intends holding a court at Cotton, 696.
  18 Jan.
    The King charges Sir J. Paston and the Duke of Norfolk to cease
      making assemblies, 698.
  17 Mar.
    Sir J. Paston gives the chapel at Caister to John Yotton, the
      Queen’s chaplain, 703.
  3 April.
    Margaret Paston is anxious to know about her son Sir John’s
      betrothal, 704.
  7 April.
    The King expected in Norfolk, 705.
  10 April.
    Lord Scales, in consideration of Sir J. Paston’s engagement to his
      kinswoman, Anne Hawte, urges the Duke of Norfolk to forbear
      trespassing on Sir John’s lands, 706, 707.
  5 May.
    Citation of the Bishop of Winchester and others as executors of Sir
      J. Fastolf, 708.
  7 May.
    Archbishop Nevill sends Sir J. Paston £20, 709.
  May.
    Ric. Calle engaged to Margery Paston, 710, 713.
  May.
    The Duke of Norfolk intends holding courts at Caister, 710.
  22 May.
    Ric. Calle cannot get a penny of rent for Paston in Suffolk or
      Flegg, 712.
  22 May.
    The King going to Walsingham, 714, 715.
  [19 June].
    _The King visits Norwich_, 716.
  June.
    The lodge at Hellesdon is pointed out to the King, 716.
  June.
    _Robin of Redesdale’s insurrection._
  9 July.
    The Queen expected at Norwich on the 18th July, 718.
  9 July.
    _The King sends a credence to Clarence, Warwick, and the Archbishop
      of York_, 719.
  Aug.
    _The King is taken prisoner near Coventry, and sent to Middleham._
  Aug.
    Caister besieged by the Duke of Norfolk, 720.
    Examination of Margery Paston and Calle by the Bishop of Norwich,
      721.

1469

  Sept.
    Sir John Paston attempts to negotiate with the Duke of Norfolk
      through the medium of the King’s Council, 722, 723, 726-9.
  12 Sept.
    Margaret Paston warns Sir John of the distress of the garrison at
      Caister, 724.
  15 Sept.
    Sir John Paston disbelieves his mother’s warning, 725.
  20 Sept.
    _Rivers and his son, Sir J. Woodville, put to death by the
      insurgents._
  26 Sept.
    Caister surrendered, 730-4.
  5 Oct.
    John Paston desires instructions about the discharged garrison of
      Caister, 735.
  Oct.
    _The King, having recovered his liberty, returns to London_,
      736.
  [Oct.]
    Richard Calle and Margery Paston at Blackborough Nunnery, 737.
  6 Nov.
    Sale of Beckham by Sir John Paston to Roger Townsende, 738.
  Dec.
    Two widows sue an appeal against John Paston, 740, 751.

1470

  Mar.
    _Insurrection of Sir Robert Welles_--the King goes into Lincolnshire
      to put it down, 742, 743.
  Mar.
    _Battle of Losecoatfield_ (_Stamford_), 760.
  May.
    Letters of W. Worcester about Titchwell, 744, 745.
  22 June.
    John Paston and others charged with felony in killing men at the
      siege of Caister, 746, 747.
  22 June.
    The Duchess of Norfolk promises to intercede for John Paston with
      her husband, 746.
  14 July.
    Agreement of Bishop Waynflete and Sir J. Paston for the termination
      of disputes about Fastolf’s will, 750.
  15 July.
    Margaret Paston complains of her sons, 752.
  July, Aug.
    Sir J. Paston pledges plate, 748, 749, 754.
  5 Aug.
    _Rebellion in the North.--Clarence and Warwick expected to land in
      England_, 753.
  10 Aug.
    Endowment of Magdalen College, Oxford, with Fastolf’s lands,
      755.
  7 Sept.
    Edward anticipates an invasion of Kent, 758.


HENRY VI. RESTORED

1470

  12 Oct.
    _Queen Elizabeth Woodville in Sanctuary_, 759.
  12 Oct.
    The Earl of Oxford befriends John Paston, 759.
  Dec.
    The Duke of Norfolk evacuates Caister and releases it to Bishop
      Waynflete, 763-5.
  28 Dec.
    Calthorpe, wishing to reduce his household, advises Margaret Paston
      to provide a marriage for her daughter Anne, 766.

1471

  14 Feb.
    Lord Beauchamp releases his interest in Caister, etc. to John
      Paston, 768.
  14 Mar.
    _Edward IV. lands at Ravenspur._--His landing anticipated by the
      Earl of Oxford, 769.
  19 Mar.
    Oxford orders the lieges of Norfolk to meet him at Lynn to resist
      King Edward, 770.
  [Mar.]
    _Clarence goes over to Edward IV._, 771.
    Register of writs against Sir J. Paston and others, 772.


EDWARD IV. RESTORED

1471

  14 April.
    _Battle of Barnet._--John Paston wounded, 774, 776.
  18 April.
    _News of Queen Margaret’s landing_, 774.
    Escape of the Earl of Oxford, 775.
  4 May.
    _Battle of Tewkesbury_, 777.
  12 May.
    _Attempt of the Bastard Falconbridge on London._
  21 May.
    _Death of Henry VI._
  23 June.
    Caister again taken by a servant of the Duke of Norfolk (W. Worc.
    Itin. 368), 778.
  5 July.
    Lord Scales (Rivers) offers to befriend John Paston, 778.
  17 July.
    The King signs a bill of pardon to John Paston, 780.
  15 Sept.
    _The Bastard Falconbridge beheaded_, 781, 782.
    Sir J. Paston desires his brother to watch Caister, 781.
    Great mortality in England, 781.
  28 Sept.
    Sir J. Paston wishes to have the measure of his father’s tomb, and
      some measurements at Gresham, 782.
  Sept.
    The King and Queen on pilgrimage to Canterbury, 782.
    One of the two widows married, 783.
  28 Oct.
    A general pardon proposed, 784.
    Inventory of Sir J. Paston’s deeds, 785.
  5 Nov.
    Death of J. Berney of Witchingham, 787.
  29 Nov.
    Margaret Paston is annoyed at Sir John’s extravagance, 791.
    Valuation of Sporle Wood, 793, 819.

1472

  8 Jan.
    Sir John Paston receives his pardon, 795.
    Queen Margaret is removed to Wallingford, 795.
  23 Jan.
    John Paston urges his brother to obtain probate of his father’s
      will, 796.
    John Paston interrupts a court which Gurney attempts to hold at
      Saxthorpe, 796.
  5 Feb.
    The one widow comes up to London to sue the appeal, 797.
  17 Feb.
    Sir John Paston and Anne Haulte, 798.
    _The King intercedes with Clarence for Gloucester_, 798.
    Purchasers offer for Sporle Wood, 798.
  30 April.
    The Earl of Northumberland gone home into the North, 800.
    Sickness prevalent, 800.
    _Archbishop Nevill committed to the Tower, and then sent to sea_,
      800.
    _The Countess of Oxford still in St. Martin’s_, 800.
    _A daughter born to the Queen at Windsor_, 800.
  14 May.
    Arrangement with Gurney about Saxthorpe, 801.
  25 May.
    Sir John Paston’s lands will not pay his debts under present
      management--his mother will disinherit him if he sell any land,
      802.
  5 June.
    Margaret Paston likely to be troubled about Sir J. Fastolf’s goods,
      803, 805.
    Henry Heydon has bought Saxthorpe and Titchwell, 803, 804.
    Sir T. Lynde’s goods, 804, 805.
    The Earl of Arran in London, 804, 805.
  8 July.
    Altercations with Sir James Gloys, 805, 810.
  20 Sept.
    Sir John Paston proposed for the borough of Maldon, 808, 809.
  21 Sept.
    Conferences with the Duchess of Norfolk about Caister, 809.
  29 Sept.
    John Paston desires a goshawk, 810, 812, 817.
  4 Nov.
    Sir J. Paston jests with the Duchess of Norfolk on her condition,
      812.
    Rivers coming home from Brittany, 812.
    The Duchess of Norfolk wishes to have Margaret Paston with her at
      her confinement, 878. [This letter has been accidently misplaced
      in the year 1475.]
  8 Nov.
    Approaching confinement of the Duchess, 813.
    John Paston going to Framlingham, 813-5, 817.
  19 Nov.
    Dr. Alen’s wife, 814, 816.
  22 Nov.
    John Paston going to Calais, 815.
  24 Nov.
    John Paston delivers a ring to a lady for his brother, 817.
  27 Nov.
    Sale of Sporle Wood, 829.
  Nov. or Dec.
    Margaret Paston desires a license to have the sacrament in her
      chapel, 821.
    Sir John Paston should come home to be at the christening of the
      Duchess of Norfolk’s child, 821.
  7 Dec.
    Agreement of Bishop Waynflete and William Worcester, 822.
  18 Dec.
    Bishop Waynflete intercedes with the Duchess of Norfolk about
      Caister, 823.
    Christening of the Duke of Norfolk’s child, 823.
    John Paston is ‘not the man he was,’ 823.
    John Paston’s petition to the Duke, 824.

  [[4 Nov.
  This letter has been accidently misplaced
  _spelling unchanged_]]

1473

  18 Jan.
    Margaret Paston wishes her son Walter not to be too hasty in taking
      orders, 825.
    Illness of John Berney of Reedham, 825.
  3 Feb.
    Sir J. Paston writes from Calais of a visit he had paid to the Duke
      of Burgundy’s court at Ghent, 826.
  8 Mar.
    J. Paston urges his mother to borrow £100 for Sir John, 828, 831,
      842.
  8 Mar.
    ‘Frenchmen whirling on the coasts,’ 828, 829.
  26 Mar.
    John Blennerhasset chosen collector in Norfolk, 829, 830.
    ‘Rather the Devil, we say, than more taxes,’ 829.
  2 April.
    _The Queen and Prince coming out of Wales to Leicester_, 830.
    _Murder of the Count of Armagnac_, 830.
    _Lewis XI. on the Somme_, 830.
  12 April.
    _The King to be after Easter at Leicester_, 831.
    John Paston’s tomb, 831, 843.
    Sir John Paston and Anne Haulte, 831.
    Sir John Paston’s instructions touching Sporle, 831, 842.
  16 April.
    Truce between Burgundy, France, and England, 832.
    _The Earl of Oxford at Dieppe, meaning to sail to Scotland_,
      832.
    Sir John Paston troubled about his servants, 832, 834.
  18 May.
    The Earl of Wiltshire and Lord Sudley dead, 833.
    John Paston going to Compostella, 833, 836.
    _Landing of the Earl of Oxford in Essex_, 833.
  5 July.
    Edmund Paston at Calais, 836.
  28 Aug.
    Armour for Sir John Paston, 838.
  16 Sept.
    Hastings to Sir J. Middleton and Sir J. Paston, 839.
  30 Sept.
    _The Earl of Oxford takes St. Michael’s Mount by surprise, but is
      afterwards besieged there._
  6 Nov.
    _The dispute between Clarence and Gloucester_, 841, 842.
    _The King has sent for the Great Seal_, 841.
  22 Nov.
    Death of Sir James Gloys, 842.
    A dispensation may be had at Rome as to Anne Haulte, 842.
    Anne Paston and Yelverton, 842.
    Citations touching John Paston’s will, 842, 843.
  25 Nov.
    _The Earl of Oxford still besieged at St. Michael’s Mount_, 843.
    Will Margaret Paston dwell at Caister, if it be recovered? 843.
    Tenants of Sporle troubled, 844.

1474

  Feb.
    _Lewis XI. at Amiens_, 846.
  20 Feb.
    _The Earl of Oxford surrenders, and is compelled to sue for his
      life_, 846.
    Sir J. Paston expects to have Caister again, 846.
  26 April.
    Hastings to John Paston at Guisnes, 847.
  25 July.
    John Paston, Elizabeth Eberton, and another lady, 850, 858.
  24 Oct.
    Will. Paston pledges plate to Eliz. Clere, 851.
  3 Nov.
    The Vicar of Paston to Margaret Paston, complaining of Henry Warns
      who intimidates the tenants at Paston, 852, 853.
      [These two letters should have been placed in the year 1479.]
  [Nov.]
    Sir John Paston recovered from illness, 856.
    Money matters between Sir J. Paston, and Townsend, and his uncle
      William, 856, 857, 861, 863, 864.
    Edmund Paston well amended, 856.
    Sir James Gloys’ books, 856, 857, 863, 865.
  20 Nov.
    Sir J. Paston redeems Sporle, 857.
    Agnes Paston recovered from illness, 857.
    Margaret, daughter of William Paston, dead, 857.
    John Paston and Lady Walgrave, 858, 860.
    John Paston and Stockton’s daughter, 858.
    A French embassy in London, 858.
  [About 8 Dec.]
    Edward IV. visits Norwich, 863.
  11 Dec.
    Lady Walgrave rejects John Paston’s ring--her muskball, 860.

1475

  17 Jan.
    Sir J. Paston going to Flanders, 861.
    _Siege of Neuss by Charles the Bold_, 861.
  29 Jan.
    William Paston endeavouring to get possession of Oxnead, 862.
    Sporle Wood cannot be sold in whole to advantage, 863, 865.
    Sir J. Paston ill in his eye and leg, 863, 865.
  5 Feb.
    Efforts for the recovery of Caister, 864.
    Sir J. Paston detained at Calais, 864.
  5 Mar.
    Margaret Paston will apply to the Archbishop of Canterbury for the
      license to have sacrament in her chapel, 866.
  29 Mar.
    The Duchess of Norfolk going to Walsingham, 868.
  23 May.
    Margaret Paston writes of money difficulties--‘the King goeth so
      near us in this country,’ 871.
    Pecock has paid two taxes for Sir J. Paston, 871.
    Sir J. Paston’s brothers going over sea, 871.
  13 June.
    Edmund Paston going over to Calais, 873.
  10 Aug.
    The Duchess of York at St. Bennet’s, 874.
  29 Aug.
    _Peace of Pecquigny_, 875.
  11 Sept.
    _The King’s army returned to Calais_, 875.
    The King had spoken to the Duke of Norfolk about Caister, 875,
      877.
    Sir John Paston the worse for Calais air, 875.
  10 Oct.
    How to get Caister again, 876.
    The King going to Walsingham, 876.
  23 Oct.
    John Paston sick, 877.
    Petition of Sir J. Paston to the King for recovery of Caister,
      879.

1476

  17 Jan.
    Death of the Duke of Norfolk, 881.
  21 Jan.
    Sir John Paston gone up to London to petition the King about
      Caister, 882.
  23 Jan.
    Sir John Paston’s ‘sending to Caister’ is ill taken, 883, 884,
      885.
  2 Mar.
    John Paston recommends Richard Stratton to Lord Hastings, 886.
    John Paston to [Margery Brews]--a love-letter, 887.
  12 Mar.
    Sir John Paston crosses with Hastings to Calais, 888.
  21 Mar.
    Lord Rivers at Rome, 889.
    _Conquest of Lorraine by Charles the Bold_, 889.
  6 May.
    John Paston welcomes his brother Sir John again to England, 890.
    John Paston thinks of Mr. Fitzwalter’s sister, 890.
  27 May.
    The King has promised that Sir J. Paston shall have Caister,
      891.

1477

  5 Jan.
    _Defeat and death of Charles the Bold at Nanci_, 900.
    Letters about John Paston and Margery Brews, 894-9.
  14 Feb.
    Great council begun yesterday, 900.
  8 Mar.
    Dame Eliz. Brews desires to meet Margaret Paston at Norwich, and not
      at Langley, 901.
  8 Mar.
    Terms offered by Sir Thomas Brews, 902, 904, 905.
  9 Mar.
    The ‘matter of Mrs. Barly,’ 903.
    Letters of John Pympe to Sir J. Paston, 906-8.
    Sir J. Paston refuses to help his brother’s marriage, 909, 916.
    The match between John Paston and Margery Brews, 910, 911, 913,
      915.
  14 April.
    Lewis XI. has gained many of the Duke of Burgundy’s towns, 912.
  23 June.
    Debt of Sir J. Paston to Henry Colet, 914.
  7 Aug.
    Manor of Sporle mortgaged to Townsend, 916, 917.
  11 Aug.
    Margaret Paston will not pay Sir John Paston’s debt to Cocket,
      917.
    Sir J. Paston to pay his brother William’s board and school-hire,
      917.
  17 Aug.
    _Lewis XI. besieges St. Omer’s, and burns Cassel_, 918.
  22 Aug.
    Manors of Agnes and William Paston, 919.
  31 Oct.
    Sir John Paston’s will, 920.
  19 Nov.
    Wreck at Winterton--Sir J. Paston’s claims as lord of the manor,
      921, 922.
  18 Dec.
    Margery Paston with child, 923.

1478

  21 Jan.
    Dr. Yotton and the chapel at Caister, 925.
    _Marriage of Richard, Duke of York, and Anne Mowbray_, 925.
    John Paston going to take his wife Margery to see her father,
      925.
  3 Feb.
    Dr. Pykenham now Judge of the Arches, 926.
    A match for Edmund Paston, 926.
    A present of dates from Margery Paston to her mother-in-law
      Margaret, 926.
  18 Feb.
    _Execution of the Duke of Clarence._
  21 Mar.
    Constance Reynforth to Sir John Paston, 928.
  5 May.
    Woods at Hellesdon and Drayton, 929.
    The Duke of Suffolk’s claim there, 929, 930.
  13 May.
    Tomb of John Paston the father not begun, 930.
    The King buying cloth of gold, 930.
  19 May.
    Walter Paston at Oxford, 931.
  20 May.
    The Duke of Suffolk at Hellesdon, 932.
    William Worcester and Sir William Bocking, 932.
    Margaret Paston very ill, 932.
  27 May.
    Margaret Paston sends cloth of gold for her husband’s tomb, 933.
    Sir J. Paston’s claim in Hellesdon and Drayton, 933.
    Sir J. Paston going to marry a kinswoman of the Queen, 933.
  31 July.
    Oxnead Parsonage, 934-7, 943.
  25 Aug.
    Birth of John Paston’s son Christopher, 936.
    The Duke of Buckingham going on pilgrimage to Walsingham, 936.
    William Brandon a ravisher, 936.
    _The Earl of Oxford at Hammes_, 936.
  7 Nov.
    William Paston, junior, at Eton, 939, 942.

1479

  18 Jan.
    Errands to Marlingford, 940.
  2 Feb.
    Dr. Pykenham informs Margaret Paston that her son Walter is not yet
      qualified to hold a benefice, 941.
  4 Mar.
    Walter Paston ready to take his B.A. and proceed in law, 944.
  22 May.
    He would be inceptor before Midsummer, 945.
  30 June.
    He takes his degree, 946.
  7 July.
    Plate of William Paston, 947, 951.
  18 Aug.
    Will of Walter Paston, 950.
  21 Aug.
    Deaths of Agnes Paston and Walter, 952.
  26 Aug.
    William Paston claims the manor of Marlingford, 953.
    Sir J. Paston inquires about his grandmother’s will, 954.
  29 Oct.
    Sir J. Paston’s dispute with Suffolk, etc., 956.
    He is very ill, 956.
    Bishop Morton offers to mediate between him and his uncle William,
      956, 957.
  6 Nov.
    The tenants of Crowmer know not who shall be their lord, 957.
  25 Nov.
    Money received and spent at the manor court at Cressingham, 961.
  Nov.
    Death and burial of Sir John Paston, 962.
    John Paston wishes his brother Edmund to enter Marlingford, etc. in
      his name, 962.
    Proceedings of Edmund Paston at Marlingford and Oxnead, 963.
  Dec.
    The great mortality abated, 965.
    Bishop Morton promises to favour John Paston against his uncle,
      965.
    Injuries done to John Paston by his uncle William, 966.

1479-80

    Touching a tombstone for Sir John Paston, 967.
    Inventory of plate, 968.

1480

  24 Feb.
    William Paston to John King, farmer of Harwelbury, 970.
    John, Prior of Bromholm, to John Paston, desiring him to procure of
      the Queen timber for his ‘dortour,’ 972.

About 1481?

    Edmund Paston will see a widow in Worsted for his brother William,
      974.
    Edmund Paston desires his mother’s forgiveness that he and his wife
      have not waited on her, 975.

1482

  4 Feb.
    Margaret Paston’s will, 978.
    John Paston to his mother about her will, 979.
  1 Nov.
    Tenants of Marlingford molested by William Paston’s officers, 982,
      983.
    Declaration of William Barker and Margaret, widow of William
      Worcester, in behalf of William Paston, 985.
    Inventory of John Paston’s books, 987.
    Verses by a lady to an absent lord, 988.


EDWARD V

1483

  11 June.
    Richard, Duke of Gloucester, to Lord Nevill, desiring him to come up
      to London with a body of men, 992.
    Elizabeth, Duchess of Suffolk, to John Paston, requesting him to
      leave his lodging for a few days, 993.


RICHARD III

1483

  10 Oct.
    The Duke of Norfolk to John Paston on an insurrection in the Weald
      of Kent, 994.
  Oct.
    _The Duke of Buckingham’s rebellion._

1484

  1 May.
    An order by the Duke of Suffolk to a farmer to pay money, 997.
    Complaints of John Paston against his uncle William, 998.
  4 Nov.
    Death of Margaret Paston, 999.
    Manors of Stansted and Harwelbury, 1000.

1485

  23 June.
    _Proclamation of Richard III. against Henry Tudor_, 1001.
  1 Aug.
    _The Earl of Richmond lands at Milford Haven_, 1002.
  22 Aug.
    _The Battle of Bosworth._


HENRY VII

1485

  23 Sept.
    Dame Elizabeth Browne to John Paston about the circumstances of her
      father’s death, 1003.
  3 Oct.
    The Countess of Surrey complains to J. Paston that her husband’s
      servants have been discharged by Lord Fitzwalter, 1004.
  20 Oct.
    Proclamations ordered against rebels confederated with the Scots,
      1006.

1486

  24 Feb.
    Alice, Lady Fitzhugh, to John Paston about her ‘daughter Lovel’s’
      suit for her husband, 1008.
  19 May.
    _Viscount Lovel escaped into the Isle of Ely_, 1009.

  [[19 May.
  _period missing or invisible_]]

1487

  24 Jan.
    Lord Lovel’s adherents, 1012.
    The Prior of Norwich touching a bequest of Judge Paston to his
      monastery, 1013.
  May.
    _Rebellion of Lambert Simnel_, 1014, 1015.
  16 June.
    _Battle of Stoke_, 1016.
    Dame Elizabeth Brews to Sir J. Paston for twelve men in harness to
      recover a distress, 1017.

1488?
    The Bishop of Chester asks of widows more than they can pay,
      1018.

1486-95

    Sir J. Paston to Dame Margery, his wife, for a plaster for the
      King’s attorney, James Hobart, 1019.

1488

    _Sir Edward Woodville goes over unauthorised to aid the Duke of
      Brittany_, 1026.
    _Rebellion against James III. in Scotland_, 1026.

1489

  2 Feb.
    A whale taken off Thornham, 1029, 1030.
  7 Mar.
    The Earl of Northumberland agrees with the King about keeping out
      the Scots, 1031.
    Intended progress of the King to Norfolk, 1031, 1033.

1486-9

    Edmund Paston appointed receiver of lands of Lord Scales, 1034,
      1035.

1489

  22 April.
    Henry VII. to the Earl of Oxford--_favourable news of the war in
      Brittany_, 1036.
  28 April.
    _Insurrection in Yorkshire--the Earl of Northumberland killed_,
      1037, 1039.
  6 May.
    Sir J. Paston ordered to meet the King at Cambridge with a body of
      men, 1038, 1039.

1490

  27 Jan.
    Sherwood, Bishop of Durham, to Sir John Paston, 1040.
    Humorous petition of Sir J. Paston to Lord Fitzwalter, 1042.
    The Earl of Surrey certifies that Thomas Hartford is not a
      Scotchman, 1043.

1491

  6 April.
    Complaints of the King of Denmark against English ships resorting
      to Iceland, 1046.
  [Sept.]
    The old and new Bailiffs of Yarmouth ask Sir J. Paston’s mediation
      with the Earl of Oxford, 1048.
  Oct.
    The Earl of Oxford to Sir J. Paston about Richard Barkeley and his
      ship, 1049-51.

1492

  18 Feb.
    Preparations for the invasion of France, 1053, 1054.
  30 April.
    William Barnard to William Paston complaining that he has been
      obliged to keep a prisoner at his own cost, 1055.

1492-3

    Letters of Elizabeth, Duchess of Norfolk, in behalf of Thomas
      Martin, 1061, 1064.

1493

    Proposal of Sir R. Clere for the marriage of Sir J. Paston’s son,
      1064.

1494

  Nov.
    _Creation of the King’s second son as Duke of York_--Knights of the
      Bath made on the occasion, 1058.

1495

  3 July.
    _Attempt of Perkin Warbeck to land at Deal_, 1059, 1060.
    Young William Paston, at Sir J. Fortescue’s place on account of the
      plague at Cambridge, 1062.

1497-1503

    Margaret, Countess of Richmond, to [Sir J. Paston?] touching the
      inheritance of the daughters of William Paston, 1063.

1499

  20 Aug.
    Sir J. Paston to inquire who were privy to the Earl of Suffolk’s
      flight beyond sea, 1065.

1500

  20 Mar.
    Sir J. Paston to be ready to attend on the Princess Catherine of
      Spain on her arrival in England, 1066.

Before 1503

    Proposed marriage of Clippesby with a niece of Sir J. Paston,
      1069

After 1503

    William Paston, Sir John’s brother, ‘crased in mind,’ 1072.
    The Earl of Oxford’s steward to the ‘Black Knight,’ in Latin verse,
      1073.

1503

  6 Feb.
    Award touching East Beckham between Sir John Paston and Roger
      Townsend, 1074.
  6 Sept.
    Archbishop Warham to William Paston on the death of his father, Sir
      John, 1075.
    John Kendal to [William Paston?] touching lands bought of the
      executors of Nich. Pickering of Filby, 1076.

1506

  31 Jan.
    _Account of the Visit of Philip, King of Castile, to Henry VII. at
      Windsor_, 1078.




ERRATA

[Transcriber’s Note:

This final page--printed at the end of Volume VI, after the Index--is
included for completeness. All listed corrections have been made in
their respective volumes.]


VOL. I.

Page 122, line 15, _for_ ‘Bourges’ _read_ ‘Bourg.’


VOL. II.

Page 30, line 7 from bottom of No. 15, _for_ ‘No. 8,’ _read_ ‘No. 13.’

 „ 154, _add_ to footnote 3, ‘He was slain at the second battle of St.
Albans on the 17th Feb. 1461.’


VOL. III.

Page 135, footnote 1, strike out the words after ‘Elizabeth Paston,’
on third line from the bottom, and _add_, ‘was no longer the wife of
Robert Poynings, but his widow, for he was killed at the second battle
of St. Albans on the 17th Feb. 1461.’


VOL. V.

Page 310, note 1, _for_ ‘Henry IV.’ _read_ ‘Edward IV.’

 „ 314, note 1. This suggestion is quite a mistake. See ‘my Robert’ in
the PS., p. 315.




  Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty
  at the Edinburgh University Press

